dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Carey_Twelve Notable Good Women  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
   
SISTER DORA.
  
  
CHAPTER I
A MODERN PANDORA
"It is when one expects nothing more for oneself that one is able to 
 love. To do good to men because we love them, to use every talent 
 we have so as to please the Father from whom we hold it for His 
 service,—there is no other way of reaching and curing this deep discontent 
 with life which hides itself under an appearance of indifference."—
Amiel's Journal.
In this great world of living, teeming human beings, all 
 hurrying to and fro on the mighty ant-hill of existence, 
 each bent on his or her little fraction of business, there 
 sometimes emerges from the shifting crowd some strong, 
 distinct personality whose influence makes itself felt from 
 the first, and who, by sheer force of will, seems to dominate 
 and hold sway over its fellows. To feeble, mediocre 
 characters there is nothing so alarming as undivided responsibility; 
 only those who are born in the purple know 
 how to fill a throne. Human nature has its aristocracy and 
 its democracy, its regality and kingship, and its proletariat, 
 its hewers of wood and drawers of water, homely and 
 plebeian. The leaders of men, the workers who have made 
 their mark in their generation, and whose name is still 
 handed down to us for reverence and admiration, at one 
 time or other in their lives have stood alone; on their way 
 to their promised land they have not feared to cross the 
 wilderness, and to endure, if needs be, their forty years of 
 wandering and unrest. "The end crowns all," that is their 
  motto; and when they take possession of their inheritance 
 they bear the travel-stains of the pilgrim and the scars of 
 the warrior; greatness is theirs, but they have suffered its 
 pains and penalties, and have not grudged to pay the price.
In considering the noted women of the Victorian era, 
 there is no more fascinating personality than Dorothy 
 pattison, the beloved Sister Dora of Walsall, once described 
 by one who knew her as "Our Pandora," unto whom the 
 great God had given all precious gifts, besides an infinite 
 hope, and "without the mischiefs."
There is profound truth in this eulogium, nevertheless. 
 Dorothy Pattison's character was a strangely complex one— 
 she was intensely human, and human nature is by no means 
 perfect. In spite of her large heart, her deep womanly 
 tenderness, her pure, sound nature, she yet made grievous 
 mistakes in her life, which cost her anguish and bitter tears, 
 and the very force of her strong will led her into error. She 
 was very humble in her own estimate of herself. "I look 
 back on my life and see 'nothing but leaves,'" she writes 
 when lying on her death-bed, spent and worn with superhuman 
 labours for her suffering fellow-creatures—"nothing 
 but leaves"; no one who knew Sister Dora would have 
 endorsed that.
Dorothy Wyndham Pattison was born in the village of 
 Hauxwell, near Richmond, in the North Riding of Yorkshire. 
 Her father, the Rev. Mark James Pattison, was the rector of 
 Hauxwell; he belonged to a Devonshire family. Dorothy 
 was the youngest but one of twelve children; she inherited 
 her beauty from her mother, and her finely proportioned 
 figure from her father.
Miss Lonsdale, in her Life of Sister Dora, gives us a 
 description of the place where she spent her childhood. 
 "Hauxwell," she writes, "is a tiny village lying on the 
 southern slope of a hill, from whence an extensive view of 
 the moors and Wensleydale is obtained. It contains between 
  two and three hundred inhabitants. The rectory is a pretty 
 little dwelling, some half-mile from the church, which is a 
 fine old building much shut in by trees. The whole village, 
 even on a bright summer day, gives the traveller an impression 
 of intense quiet, if not dulness; but in winter, when the 
 snow lies thickly for weeks together in the narrow lane, the 
 only thoroughfare of the place, when the distant moors look 
 cold in their garment of white, and the large expanse of sky 
 is covered with leaden-coloured clouds, when the very 
 streams with which the country abounds are frozen into 
 silence—then, indeed, may Hauxwell be called a lonely 
 village."
Dorothy appears to have been a very delicate child, and 
 much petted by her sisters. She was not allowed to learn 
 much on account of her weak health; but her mind was 
 vigorous, and she seemed to pick up crumbs of information 
 almost instinctively. Even in early childhood she observed 
 things minutely, and stored up in her memory the results of 
 her observations. She very soon showed a great determination 
 to have her own way; but though wilful, she was not 
 passionate, and her disposition was affectionate and unselfish.
"If she could not get her own way easily," we read, "she 
 did not give it up or take refuge in sulks, or in an outbreak 
 of temper, like most children; rather the meeting with 
 opposition seemed to stimulate her active mind to find a 
 device for getting her way back." There is an amusing 
 anecdote told in illustration of this, of how Dorothy and her 
 next sister tried to spoil some obnoxious velvet bonnets by 
 putting their heads out of window one rainy day, and then 
 laying them in their boxes soaking wet. "Quite spoilt: we 
 can never wear them any more," was her answer when 
 questioned about the bonnets; but, to their chagrin, the little 
 culprits were condemned to wear them for many Sundays.
When Dorothy was fourteen she had a severe illness, 
 accompanied by terrible spasms, and it was then she learnt 
  to bear pain with such fortitude, "combined with an aptitude 
 for always looking on the bright side of everything—a habit 
 which never forsook her through life." After this her health 
 began to improve.
The Pattison family were devoted to the village people. 
 The girls would plan how to save their money, that they 
 might give it away; they would mend their old dresses to 
 avoid buying new ones, and give away their dinner and 
 dine on bread and cheese. To give was a delight to them, 
 and Dorothy shared their devotion to the poor. A boy 
 who had fallen ill of rheumatic fever during her absence 
 abroad, longed incessantly to see "Miss Dora" again before 
 he died. On her return she went to him at once, and 
 nursed him till he died. This seems to have been the only 
 instance of her nursing sick people in early youth; her 
 chief work at that time was training the village choir. She 
 had a clear, powerful voice, with a love for music. As her 
 health grew stronger she was also a daring horsewoman; she 
 loved to follow the hounds, and go to meets with her 
 brothers. She often described to her patients in after years 
 her rides across the wild moorlands. She was also fond of 
 driving herself in a pony carriage, and enjoyed running, 
 jumping, and playing games.
By the time she was twenty Dora, as she was now called, 
 had become tall and strong, full of restless, untiring energy 
 that never allowed her to be inactive for a minute, and with 
 a flow of bright, natural spirits. One neighbour writes, 
 "Her merry laugh is still in my ears"; and another spoke 
 of her "as a bright bonnie maiden singing about the house." 
 Her personal beauty was remarkable; "her features were 
 almost perfect; her white teeth and brilliant dark-brown 
 eyes set widely apart and twinkling with merry sympathy," 
 were some of her attractions, and also her small, beautifully 
 shaped hands. "Perhaps later on in life," writes Miss 
 Lonsdale, "the powerful form of her chin and jaw, reminding 
  one of Dante's profile, became too marked for beauty. 
 At the age of twenty, however, the dark, lightly curling hair 
 waving all over her head, which no amount of cutting off 
 or covering with caps could ever smooth, the softness and 
 roundness of youth, the extreme beauty of her whole 
 colouring and complexion, made her a fascinating creature 
 to look upon."
A country life did not satisfy Dora; her sympathies were 
 roused by Miss Nightingale's work in Scutari, and she begged 
 her father to allow her to join her band of nurses. This 
 request was refused. He pointed out to her that she was 
 wholly untrained and undisciplined, and that she had enough 
 to employ her at home; and though she chafed secretly 
 under the disappointment, she still did her home duties 
 cheerfully. Her mother was an invalid, and she did much 
 of the nursing, and her father called her "his sunshine." 
 Sister Dora always believed in presentiments. During 
 a visit to her brother she had a dream. She thought 
 her mother stood beside her bed, and called, "Dora, Dora, 
 Dora!" It left such a vivid impression on her mind that 
 she told her old servant about it. The next night the dream 
 returned, and Dora was convinced that her mother was in 
 danger and wanted her. Her brother tried to laugh her out 
 of the intention of sending to the neighbouring town for 
 letters; but she persisted in doing so, and a letter which 
 had been delayed three days was found, telling her of her 
 mother's dangerous illness. She returned home at once, 
 and found her on her deathbed. She died soon after. 
 Dora was now deprived of her chief home occupation; 
 her mother's death and other circumstances increased her 
 longing for an active life.
During her visits to Redcar she became acquainted with 
 some of the members of a large working Sisterhood calling 
 themselves "the Good Samaritans," whose headquarters 
 were at Coatham, where they had a convalescent home.
  
As her quiet life grew more distasteful to her, she began to 
 think these Sisters were to be envied. Her father disapproved 
 of her leaving home for other work, though he 
 would not actually forbid it. Dora was nine-and-twenty, 
 and certainly old enough to know her own mind. "I was 
 very wilful; I did very wrong; let no one take me for an 
 example," were her words on her deathbed, as though the 
 memory of her waywardness had burdened her conscience 
 through life. Her strong will prevailed, and in October 
 1861 Dora left Hauxwell Rectory, and became nominally 
 village schoolmistress in the parish of Woolston, near 
 Bletchley, on the borders of Buckingham. Her father continued 
 her allowance. This and the small salary belonging 
 to her office was all she had to live upon. She had a small 
 cottage, kept no servant, only an old woman came in now 
 and then do the scrubbing; but she seemed to have spent 
 three years happily enough. Her beauty and highly-bred 
 appearance soon excited interest in the neighbourhood, and 
 her devotion to children made her popular. She visited 
 them in their homes, and nursed them when they were ill. 
 At times her loneliness must have tried her, and once she 
 had an unpleasant experience with burglars who made off 
 with her silver spoons and forks.
At the end of three years her health suffered. A neglected 
 cold resulted in a severe attack of pleurisy, and when fit to 
 be moved she was sent to Redcar for change. The old 
 associations connected with the place revived, and in the 
 autumn of 1864 she joined the Sisterhood of the "Good 
 Samaritans" in spite of the disapproval of her family. It 
 was impossible for those who knew her best to acquiesce 
 in this step. They were too well aware that she was 
 singularly unfitted for a Sister's life. The atmosphere was 
 too restricted; and though she was soon very popular, 
 there was no denying that she disliked the sole society of 
 women, and somewhat despised their limited physical 
  power. Her intellectual gifts and "pride of life," and her 
 keen sense of humour, were likely to be snares to her.
But there were other reasons that were urging her to 
 work—a profound restlessness and mental dissatisfaction. 
 We read "that before she went to Woolston she fell under 
 the influence of an intellect more powerful than her own, 
 and the result of her contact with it was a shock to the very 
 foundations of her religious faith.… Her mind was filled 
 with doubts relating to the authenticity and inspiration of 
 the Holy Scriptures, so that she could not give herself up to 
 that personal devotion to Christ, without which her nature 
 could not be satisfied."
The Sisterhood of the Good Samaritans was a secular 
 community, and the members took no vows except that 
 of obedience to the Mother Superior and the clergyman. 
 Sister Dora's training was very distasteful to her; she 
 made beds, scoured floors and grates, and finally became 
 cook at Coatham. She actually sat down and cried one 
 day when the beds she had made were pulled to pieces 
 by some one in authority, and she had to remake them.
Her first attempts at nursing were made in the Cottage 
 Hospital at North Annesley, near Middlesbrough, where 
 she worked sometimes alone or with other Sisters.
In the early part of 1865 Sister Dora was sent to Walsall, 
 to a small cottage hospital, which had been established 
 the year before and was in charge of the Good Samaritan 
 Sisterhood. Walsall was a town at that time containing 
 about thirty-five thousand inhabitants, on the borders of the 
 great coal and iron district in South Staffordshire called 
 "The Black Country." There is a vivid description of 
 Walsall in Sister Dora's "Life." One seems to see the 
 forests of tall chimneys belching out smoke and flame, 
 the "rows of dusky little red-brick houses, the huge cranes 
 and dirty canals," which are so strangely transfigured and 
 glorified at sunrise and sunset. At night, we read, "the 
  spectator seems to be transported into the infernal regions, 
 where the blinding glare of blast furnaces, the snorting 
 of engines, the ponderous thud of steam hammers, and the 
 clang and whiz and whirr of machinery, sounds that never 
 cease and which are less noticed during the day, bewilder 
 the senses."
The Birmingham hospitals were seven miles away, and 
 as accidents were becoming frequent, it was necessary to 
 have an accident hospital in Walsall. At first there were 
 only four beds, but before the first twelve months had 
 passed there were fourteen. The Sister in charge had 
 fallen ill, and Sister Dora took her place. Unfortunately 
 she soon after caught small-pox from one of the out-patients, 
 and was very ill; in her delirium she occupied herself in 
 tearing up her sheets into bandages. As soon as she 
 recovered she resumed her nursing.
The Walsall people were rough and ignorant, and at first 
 there was a good deal of prejudice against the Sisters, 
 which gradually died out. Once, as Sister Dora was walking 
 through the town late in the evening, a boy called out: 
 "There goes one of those Sisters of Misery," and threw 
 a stone which cut open her forehead. This young fellow 
 was afterwards brought to the hospital much injured, and 
 was tenderly nursed by Sister Dora. One night she 
 found him crying, and when she asked him what was 
 the matter, he said, with a sob, "Sister, I threw that 
 stone at you." To his astonishment she told him that 
 she had recognised him the moment he had been brought 
 in. "It was his first practical experience of good returned 
 for evil," observed Sister Dora, "and he did not know 
 what to make of it."
She was recalled to Coatham in 1865. Sister Dora's 
 irrepressible flow of spirits sometimes carried her away; 
 once, for example, when she insisted on mounting a donkey 
 renowned for his trick of kicking his rider off: the result 
  was she fell on her knees, which were so bruised and 
 swollen that she could not kneel without pain for weeks 
 afterwards, but she dare not confess the cause of her 
 suffering. Not long after this the celebrated physician, 
 Sir James Simpson, came to the Home to find a Sister who 
 would take charge of a lady who was nearly insane. His 
 choice fell on Sister Dora. She was making a pudding 
 with her sleeves tucked up when he saw her, and he said 
 at once: "Send me that Sister; she is the one for my case."
The new patient lived near Coatham. Sister Dora had 
 to sit up with her at night and return to the Home to sleep. 
 From her own account it was not a pleasant berth: "An 
 uncommonly unpleasant time I used to have of it," she 
 would say; "what with the mad old lady who was fond 
 of me, with the relations who were jealous of me, and with 
 the flunkey who, because I had my breakfast in the 
 housekeeper's room, took me for a servant, paying me 
 attentions, and making love to me after the manner of his 
 kind, by getting me good things to eat."
Sister Dora had one sensational experience, when her 
 half-crazy patient, angry because her nurse would not accept 
 some valuable jewellery, suddenly sprang out of bed and 
 brandished a long knife over her head. As Sister Dora 
 looked at her calmly she laid it aside, only saying, "I 
 wanted to see if I could frighten you." After this Sister 
 Dora always accepted the gifts, and then gave them up 
 to the relatives the next day.
In November Sister Dora was again sent to Walsall, and 
 though from time to time she went back to Coatham, her 
 hospital work began steadily, and in spite of her want of 
 training she impressed the medical men, with a sense of her 
 fitness. Towards the middle of December she was ordered 
 to nurse a private case in Devonshire; before final arrangements 
 were made she received a letter from home telling 
 her that her father was dangerously ill and wished to see 
  her. She telegraphed to the Home for permission to go to 
 Hauxwell, and received the unfeeling answer, "No, you 
 must go to Devonshire at once."
The order seems almost incredible, yet Sister Dora with a 
 mistaken sense of duty set off to Devonshire; but she had 
 scarcely reached her destination before she received the 
 tidings of her father's death. She was almost broken-hearted, 
 and when the Mother Superior gave her permission to 
 attend the funeral she refused to go. From this moment 
 a breach commenced between her and Coatham, which 
 widened as the years went on.
No wonder that in her sorrow Sister Dora plunged eagerly 
 into work when she returned to Walsall. She was very 
 ignorant, and her great ambition was to become a good 
 surgical nurse. The in-patients were mostly men and boys 
 disabled by coal-pit accidents or wounded by machinery, 
 while a large number of out-patients—men, women and 
 children—visited the hospital daily for medical advice or for 
 the treatment of injuries. The old doctor who was attached 
 to the hospital soon found out for himself that Sister Dora 
 had more coolness, courage, and common sense than most 
 women possessed, and he taught her a great deal. She was 
 allowed to set simple fractures under his superintendence, 
 and then, as he discovered the remarkable delicacy of her 
 touch, he began to teach her the position of the arteries 
 in the human body. No doubt her apprenticeship must 
 have been tolerably severe, as hospital nursing entails 
 constant strain and fatigue.
Just before she left Coatham she had received an offer of 
 marriage; but though she was for some time undecided 
 whether to accept it or not, her affections were not deeply 
 engaged, and she finally resolved not to leave her work.
Her natural instincts inclined her strongly to the ordinary 
 lot of women. Her love for children amounted to a passion, 
 and she never ceased to regret that she would never have 
  children of her own. Later in life she was heard to say, "If 
 I had to begin life over again I would marry, because a 
 woman ought to live with a man and be in subjection."
In early life she thought differently, and though her 
 friends told her that she was throwing herself away, that 
 her rare talents were wasted, and that she was admirably 
 fitted for domestic life, her strong will was not to be 
 coerced. Her reserve prevented her from disclosing her 
 real reasons; but she herself felt "that her only hope of 
 gaining light in her period of darkness lay in active work 
 for the good of others"; so, to use the words of one who 
 helped her in her difficulties, "she threw into her work 
 at Walsall great powers of mind, strong enthusiasm and 
 wonderful imagination."
Her main stumbling-block was the acuteness of her intellect. 
 When she was able to receive historical Christianity, 
 her personal devotion to her Divine Master seemed almost 
 to overwhelm her, and no self-sacrifice seemed too great. 
 The wise counsels of a friend restrained her impetuosity, 
 and prevented her from taking binding vows and entering 
 a strict Sisterhood. He pointed out to her, that her special 
 calling was active service, and that her work exactly suited 
 her. Happily she took his advice, and commenoed her 
 work in a quiet, unobtrusive way, nursing not only in the 
 hospital, but poor creatures in the slums and alleys who were 
 too wretched to present themselves at the hospital.
In 1866 she had a serious illness brought on by exposure 
 and neglect of ordinary precautions. She would come 
 home soaked through, to find a crowd of out-patients awaiting 
 her; wet clothes were constantly forgotten and allowed 
 to dry on her. She did this once too often. After two or 
 three weeks she was dangerously ill.
A clergyman who visited her constantly during her illness 
 was amazed at the fortitude with which she bore 
 pain. She had asked him to wait a moment before he 
  commenced to read. He related how "she turned away her 
 face which was smiling, beautiful as he thought he had never 
 seen a human face before; and his daughter, who was on 
 the other side of the bed, was shocked to see it suddenly 
 convulsed, as if with sharp agony, the tears streaming down 
 the cheeks and the hands clutching convulsively at the bedclothes. 
 In a moment she turned back calmly to him and 
 said, 'Go on.'"
Sister Dora always expressed her strong belief that her 
 recovery from this illness was due to the prayers of the 
 congregation at St. James, Wednesbury. The incumbent of 
 this church was the Rev. Richard Twigg, of whom it was 
 said that he had "buried talents which would have won the 
 admiration of the world in the smokiest dens of the Black 
 Country." Sister Dora owed much to his teaching and 
 influence, "and his was the main human support to which 
 she consistently clung throughout her life."
In 1867 it was evident that the cottage hospital was 
 inadequate to the needs of Walsall. Its situation did not 
 admit of free ventilation. Fatal erysipelas broke out, and one 
 man was under treatment for six months, but when an amputation 
 case was sent out unhealed the authorities felt it had 
 received its deathblow, and it was resolved to build a new 
 hospital on a larger scale in a better situation. The town 
 of Walsall stands on a steep hill. There was an open space 
 covered with blackened grass sloping up to a second brow of 
 the same hill called the Mount, where the church was; and 
 here the new hospital was built. It contained twenty-eight 
 beds, and three wards, and was so arranged that it was just 
 possible for one person of Sister Dora's calibre to do the 
 entire nursing.
The out-patient department was, however, too small for 
 the numbers who crowded into it, and was unconnected with 
 the main building. "This defect was remedied by Sister 
 Dora herself, who devised a plan to connect it with the 
  hospital by a glass passage, which she converted into a 
 greenhouse."
A kitchen garden and a green lawn surrounded the 
 building, and in spite of the exposed situation trees and 
 shrubs flourished. From the windows there was a prospect 
 of chimneys and machinery, and a wide extent of sky 
 beyond. As the line of the South Staffordshire railroad 
 ran at the bottom of the hill the patients had plenty of 
 amusement.
About this time small-pox broke out in Walsall and 
 lingered on for several months. Sister Dora did all she 
 could for the sufferers. Whenever she could snatch an hour 
 she visited the sick people in their own homes, and sometimes 
 sat up whole nights with dying patients who had been 
 deserted by their friends. She had no terror of infection, 
 and would dress the wounds of out-patients who had the 
 small-pox out on them; and it has been thought by some 
 that her recklessness about her own safety was in a great 
 measure caused by her secret grief at her father's death, 
 and her remorse at the course she had taken.
There is one story told in her memoir that reads like one 
 belonging to a mediæval saint, and which would have been 
 worthy of St. Francis of Assisi, or St. Vincent de Paul, and 
 which proves, not only her deep pity and love for suffering 
 humanity, but also her wonderful nerve and heroic endurance. 
 A poor man dying of "black-pox," who was much 
 attached to her, sent for her one night. There was only a 
 small piece of candle in the house, and she asked a neighbour 
 who was with him to buy her some more, but the woman 
 never returned. All at once the dying man raised himself 
 and asked her to kiss him before he died; and, loathsome 
 as he was with the horrible disease, she took the poor 
 creature in her arms and kissed him, then, as the candle 
 went out, she sat beside him in the darkness, not knowing if 
 he were alive or dead, till the faint dawn allowed her to 
  grope her way to the door. It was an ordeal that few 
 women, however brave or good, could have endured.
An old servant of the Pattison family had come to help 
 her at Walsall. She looked after the two servants, kept the 
 hospital linen, and assisted her in many ways; she even 
 learnt to dress wounds, and sometimes sat up with a patient.
Sister Dora's sympathy was often excited by the misery of 
 the poor men who had to submit to amputation; many of 
 them would have preferred death. One day a young man 
 was brought to the hospital with his arm so torn and twisted 
 by a machine that the doctor said he must amputate it at once. 
 Sister Dora's heart was wrung at the poor fellow's despair. 
 She looked at the torn limb, and then at the stalwart, healthy 
 form of the young man, then she turned to the surgeon and 
 told him quietly that she believed that she could save the 
 arm if he would permit her to try. The doctor reiterated his 
 former opinion, that unless the limb was at once amputated 
 mortification would set in, but Sister Dora persisted that she 
 could save him. The patient joyfully consented to submit to 
 her treatment, but the doctor was deeply incensed. "Well, 
 remember it's your arm," he said, as he walked off in high 
 dudgeon. "If you choose to have that young man's death 
 on your conscience I shall not interfere, but I wash my 
 hands of him."
It was a terrible responsibility for Sister Dora, but her 
 patient's confidence in her encouraged her. She watched 
 "her arm," as she called it, night and day for three weeks. 
 "How I prayed over that arm!" she said afterwards. At 
 the end of the time she invited the doctor to see the result of 
 her nursing. To his astonishment the arm, when unbandaged, 
 was straightened, and in a healthy, promising condition. 
 "Why, you have saved it," he exclaimed, and no wonder 
 Sister Dora cried for happiness when she heard it. "Sister's 
 arm," as the young man was called in the hospital, was 
 devoted to her, and even when he was back at his work he 
  would come up to have his arm looked at as an excuse for 
 seeing the dear Sister again.
Sister Dora's influence over children was almost magical. 
 Her passionate love for them taught her how to comfort 
 them. She would carry about some miserable little scalded 
 creature wrapped in a blanket, on one arm, instead of 
 putting it to bed to cry itself to sleep. "Don't you cry—
 Sister's got you," she would say, and with her other hand she 
 would dress wounds and do other things.
She had immense influence over the rough men and 
 women who came to the hospital. She never allowed bad 
 language in the wards; she made them feel the dignity of 
 her presence, and she knew, too, how to make them feel 
 ashamed of themselves.
Drunkenness was rife amongst the dwellers of the 
 Black Country, and innumerable cases of hopeless bad 
 legs, or old wounds breaking out afresh, were the result of 
 intemperance. Sister Dora would remonstrate with her 
 patients, and declared to them that unless they amended 
 their ways she would not go on attending to them; but 
 they knew better, and that her pity for them would never 
 weary, and that she would never cease to dress their 
 wounds, and try and win them to a better life. Once 
 when a protegé of hers, a young fellow, had broken his 
 promise to her, and came reeling into the ward, she laid 
 down her head on the table and cried bitterly.
The men soon found she cared for them individually, and 
 that she never forgot them. When they left the hospital 
 her prayers followed them, and they knew they would 
 always be sure of a welcome from "Sister."
  
CHAPTER II
"FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH"
"Therefore gird up thyself, and come, to stand 
 Unflinching under the unfaltering hand 
 That waits to prove thee to the uttermost. 
 It were not hard to suffer by His hand, 
 If thou couldst see His face;—but in the dark! 
 That is the one last trial—be it so. 
 …Not by sight, but faith; 
 Endure, endure,—be faithful to the end."
 Harriet King.
Sister dora's sense of humour and delightful flow 
 of spirits kept the wards cheerful. "Make you laugh!" 
 remarked a big Irishman, "she'd make you laugh if you 
 were dying." She would invent games for the boys, and 
 when she had a few minutes to spare she would read to the 
 men, and now and then play chess or draughts with them. 
 She did not care to nurse the women, though she did her 
 duty by them. She always went her rounds with the 
 surgeon, and each night visited every patient. She carved 
 at every meal herself, and if the out-patients were numerous 
 the men would rather wait for their tea than have it served 
 by any one else. She was so full of sympathy for them, 
 so tender in her inquiries, so merry and full of fun, her 
 father's name of Sunshine so exactly suited her, and then 
 she was so natural and original.
"I have thoughts too big for my brains," she remarked 
 once; and another time, "My dear, if I could not laugh 
  over the things, I don't know what I should do;" for, in 
 spite of her merry ways, her heart was very tender.
She never yielded her will in matters she considered 
 important; she would employ drollery and humour and all 
 manner of feminine devices to get her own way with the 
 committee of management, and when every attempt failed 
 would give in her resignation; this always brought them to 
 reason.
Her position was a strangely solitary one. The clergy lived 
 too far off for companionship, and her intercourse with the 
 doctors was only in the way of business. She was in this 
 isolated condition when a man crossed her path in whose 
 society she took an ever-increasing pleasure. In intellect 
 he was her superior; he could give her the sympathy and 
 support for which she had longed all her life, and he loved 
 her with intense devotion; but, alas! he had held sceptical 
 views, and she knew this from the first.
It was a fearful temptation, and for a time she yielded to 
 it. She became engaged to him. The same friend who had 
 helped her before now pleaded with her to be true to her 
 profession for the sake of others, if not for herself. In the 
 end his arguments prevailed, and she was induced to 
 break off her engagement; but the whole thing gave her 
 acute suffering, and a severe illness ensued, an attack of 
 pyæmia came on, and matter formed in the knee. The old 
 surgeon feared that amputation would be necessary to save 
 life, but Sister Dora vowed she would rather die than 
 submit to it, and ever after she showed a sad recklessness 
 about her health. We read that "the poor old doctor 
 went out of the hospital in tears, saying 'If Sister Dora dies 
 I'll never enter these doors again.'" But she made up her 
 mind that she was going to live; and after she had been a 
 month ill, hearing that there was to be a serious operation 
 she got out of bed and went straight to her work without 
 passing through any stage of convalescence. While she was 
  ill the young man whose arm she had saved walked eleven 
 miles each Sunday to ask after her. When he received his 
 answer, he said, "Tell her that's her arm that rang the 
 bell," and walked back.
In the spring of 1869 Sister Dora did some private 
 nursing; but during the three weeks she had to go back to 
 Walsall twice to induce some patient to submit to a necessary 
 operation.
Children who had been terribly burnt or scalded were 
 often brought to the hospital; her treatment of the poor 
 little creatures was both wise and tender. If the child 
 were badly burnt, or beside itself with terror, she did not at 
 once try to dress the wounds; she only excluded the air by 
 means of cotton-wool, and wrapt it in a blanket, putting hot 
 bottles and flannel to the feet. Then she fed it with milk 
 and brandy and tried to soothe it. When the nerves were 
 quieted she could then attend to the wounds without exciting 
 fresh terror. If the child died, she was glad to know that 
 it had not been uselessly tormented.
Her care for the little ones was truly maternal. She 
 constantly took one, sometimes two, children into her own 
 bed; and she has been known to sleep with a burnt baby on 
 each arm, in spite of the sickening effluvia from the burns. 
 One little girl of nine years was so badly burnt that she 
 only lived a few hours. Sister Dora gave up her other 
 work, and devoted herself to the dying child, talking to her 
 about heaven and her Saviour. All pain had ceased, and 
 the child died peacefully. Her last words were, "When 
 you come to heaven, Sister, I'll meet you at the gates 
 with a bunch of flowers." In the Memoirs of Sister Dora 
 there is a long and interesting account, written by one of 
 her lady pupils, which gives us an idea of her ordinary day's 
 work at Walsall.
"Sister Dora," she narrates, "used to come down into 
 the wards at half-past six in the morning, make the beds of 
  all the patients who were able to get up, and give them 
 their breakfast by half-past seven, when it was time for her 
 own breakfast. The bright sunshiny way she always worked, 
 with a smile and a pleasant word for every one, was in itself 
 a medicine of the best kind.… No one had ever seen 
 such a woman as this before; so beautiful, so good, so tenderhearted, 
 so strong and so gentle, so full of fun and humour, 
 and of sympathy for broken hearts as well as for every other 
 kind of fracture, and the best friend that many of these poor 
 maimed men had ever known.… After her own breakfast 
 she read prayers on the staircase, so that all the patients in 
 the three wards could hear and join. Then came the daily 
 ward work, the washing up breakfast things and of patients, 
 and the dressing of wounds. At half-past ten there were 
 usually several out-patients who came regularly to have their 
 wounds poulticed or lanced or otherwise attended to. The 
 doctor generally appeared about eleven, and went his rounds. 
 At twelve came the patients' dinner, at which Sister Dora 
 attended minutely to every detail, and always carved herself. 
 Then she read prayers in the little general sitting-room, the 
 lady pupils, if there were any, and the servants only attending. 
 Then followed dinner for the nurses—a very movable feast, 
 sometimes put off for an hour or more, and sometimes 
 omitted altogether, as far as Sister Dora was concerned, if 
 any visitors whom she was obliged to see or any accidents 
 came in at that time. Out-patients, who were treated every 
 day, began to arrive at two, and truly their name was Legion. 
 It was no uncommon event for sixty or a hundred persons 
 to pass through the little rooms in the course of one 
 afternoon. It was a most interesting sight to watch Sister 
 Dora with her out-patients.… The doctors got through 
 their part of the work quickly, for they passed on to her 
 such minor operations and dressings as are entrusted to 
 experienced dressers in large hospitals. The setting of 
 fractures, and even the drawing of teeth, when no surgeon 
  was present, were common operations to her. … The 
 treatment of the out-patients often took between two and 
 three hours, so that the in-patients' tea at five o'clock had 
 sometimes to be prepared by servants, when neither Sister 
 Dora nor her pupil could be spared. At half-past five or 
 six the nurses had their tea. … After tea she went into 
 the wards again, and this was the time to which her patients 
 looked forward all day. She would go and talk to them then 
 individually, or a probationer would play the harmonium 
 and they would sing hymns, she joining with her strong 
 cheery voice while she washed up the tea-things. … By 
 eight, wounds had been dressed for the night, and the 
 patients' supper was served. Sister Dora read prayers 
 always, even when, as sometimes happened, her many 
 duties and labours so delayed her that most of the patients 
 were asleep; 'for,' she said, 'the prayers go up for them 
 all the same.' Just before bedtime came her own supper, 
 when she would often be very merry, and would relate her 
 many remarkable experiences with intense fun and drollery."
Sister Dora always took the heaviest part of the work on 
 herself, and she preferred doing as much as possible herself. 
 She was the first up and the last to go to rest. Bishop 
 Selwyn called her "the one-horse chay." She had strong, 
 even violent prejudices, which she tried not to show to her 
 lady pupils; but she was a patient teacher, and never grudged 
 time or trouble. She said once to a lady who was engaging 
 a servant for the hospital, "Tell her this is not an ordinary 
 house or hospital. I want her to understand that all who 
 serve here, in whatever capacity, ought to have one rule— 
 love for God, and then I need not say love for their work. 
 I wish we could use and really mean the word Maison-Dieu,"
She was a devout believer in prayer. "Pray without 
 ceasing" seemed to be her motto. When the wards were 
 quiet she might often be seen kneeling by the bed of some 
  unconscious sufferer. She still continued to believe in 
 presentiments. One night, after a serious amputation had 
 been performed, she woke up suddenly with a strong conviction 
 that something was wrong. It was impossible to 
 sleep; so she got up and went to the patient, and found 
 one of the larger arteries had broken away from its ligatures, 
 and that he was slowly bleeding to death. She secured the 
 artery in time to save his life.
She would never allow a corpse to remain a moment 
 longer than necessary in the ward. One night a patient 
 saw her take up the corpse of a man who had just died, 
 and carry it straight to the mortuary. People have often 
 received this story with incredulity, but it is an undoubted 
 fact that Sister Dora's magnificent physique and wonderful 
 strength enabled her to do more than other ordinary women. 
 A friend whose sister once worked with Sister Dora told the 
 writer of this sketch that Sister Dora gloried in her own 
 strength. She would come into the ward with a dish containing 
 a joint of beef weighing about eighteen or twenty 
 pounds in one hand, and a dish of vegetables in the other, 
 and say, "None of you could do this!" She was indeed an 
 athlete among women. She would pick up a huge collier 
 who had fallen out of bed, and put him back like a baby; 
 and yet with all these strains, little food and insufficient 
 rest, her health did not seem to suffer.
Every one knows the story of the chopped-off finger, and 
 how she sent the boy back to fetch it; and how she set the 
 fracture, and the finger healed.
In 1871 her grateful patients subscribed £50, with which 
 they bought a small carriage and pony, and presented them 
 to her. At first Sister Dora was rather embarrassed by the 
 gift, but she soon found it useful for convalescent patients 
 and for visiting sick people in the town. In the March of 
 1873 a mission was held at Walsall, and Sister Dora, with 
 her customary energy, took an active part. In September 
  she had a few days' holiday, and went to see the autumn 
 manœuvres. In October she had a short but sharp attack 
 of fever, caught in nursing a bad case; but she soon recovered, 
 and wrote to a friend that "the hospital was full 
 of interesting cases—one man with a compound fracture of 
 each leg, and no less than thirty cuts on his head."
During one of her visits to Redcar she was bathing one 
 day, when a woman got out of her depth. Sister Dora 
 swam out to her, and tried to assist her; but the poor 
 woman had lost all self-control, and clung to her so 
 frantically that they were both in danger of being drowned. 
 Sister Dora held her up until her cries for help attracted 
 the attention of a gentleman, and he came to their rescue.
In August 1874 she had a well-earned holiday, and 
 joined a sister and her children at Redcar. In the autumn 
 of 1874 she took a number of convalescent patients to 
 Rhyl. Their ages ranged from two years old to sixty. 
 Only one of the patients had ever seen the sea before. It 
 was an immense success. The necessary funds had been 
 provided by a former lady pupil.
On another occasion she took seven or eight boys, all of 
 whom had suffered surgical operations, to Sutton Park, near 
 Walsall; and sometimes she took a number of patients, 
 night-nurses, and humble friends to Lichfield for the day. 
 She paid most of the expenses of the expeditions herself. 
 Her charity was great. No one knew what her income 
 really was; but Mr. Pattison's property was considerable, 
 and it was divided among his children. Her benevolence 
 was unceasing. Servants worn with illness, governesses, 
 and workers were often helped. She was very anxious to 
 establish a convalescent home by the seaside, but during 
 her life this project was never carried out. She used to 
 send her patients to the home at Coatham, until, at the end 
 of 1874, she broke off all connection with the community of 
 the "Good Samaritans." When questioned as to her reasons 
  for leaving the Sisterhood, her reply was, "I am a woman, 
 and not a piece of furniture."
When the committee received an official communication 
 informing them that the Sisterhood would no longer be 
 responsible for the nursing at Walsall, they at once requested 
 Sister Dora to take the entire management. In November 
 1874 she heard of the death of a dear sister, and for some 
 time she was doubtful whether her duty did not lie with her 
 bereaved brother-in-law and his motherless children; but 
 after some weeks of indecision she made up her mind to 
 seek advice, and she was counselled to remain at Walsall. 
 During the struggle she had written: "I am afraid it is all 
 selfishness on my part which makes me hesitate. No one 
 knows what it will cost me to give up the work here, home, 
 friends, and go to that barren moor." This decision was 
 a great relief to her, and from this time she worked harder 
 than ever. She literally spent herself for the sick, the 
 sinful, and the sorrowful, who sent for her from all sides. 
 "Send for Sister Dora" was their cry; and she never 
 failed them.
In the early part of February 1875 there was another 
 outbreak of small-pox in Walsall, which spread with frightful 
 rapidity. The Mayor and Corporation had erected an 
 epidemic hospital on the outskirts of the town; but the poor 
 people refused to go—"they would rather die at home." 
 In this dilemma Sister Dora came to the rescue. She 
 offered to leave her work and nurse the small-pox patients 
 and this offer was joyfully accepted by the authorities 
 They knew well that if Sister Dora were in charge of the 
 epidemic hospital they would be willing to send their 
 relatives to be nursed there. Her generous devotion would 
 save Walsall. The cottage hospital was left under the 
 care of three lady pupils. She gave them no special orders; 
 told them they must divide the work and do their best until 
 she returned. They would have the doctor's supervision, 
  but no one could fill her place to the unhappy small-pox 
 sufferers.
One must touch here on a weak point in Sister Dora's 
 character—a serious defect in a singularly beautiful nature: 
 she was unwilling that any one should even temporarily fill 
 her place. This jealousy was strangely unworthy of her; and 
 there is no doubt that her work and the hospital suffered 
 from her tendency to dislike any woman worker who showed 
 marked ability, and who was capable of taking her place. 
 This was a sad blemish, and it led to unhappy results, for it 
 made her gather round her second-or third-rate workers who 
 were incapable of being her rivals. It was a flaw in an 
 otherwise almost perfect character; but possibly she was 
 hardly aware of this defect herself. She went to the 
 epidemic hospital with the conviction that she would 
 probably take the complaint and die; but for once her 
 presentiment was wrong.
The epidemic hospital stands in the midst of heaps of 
 "slag," the refuse of the iron furnaces. "It seems the 
 end of the earth," Miss Lonsdale tells us, "and you look 
 back upon smoky Walsall, with its crowning steeple and 
 teeming inhabitants, as from a desert land.… The hospital 
 is a long, low building of one storey, forming two sides of a 
 square, with its entrance in the angle. In front about a 
 quarter of an acre of ground is planted with cabbages for 
 the use of the patients, and these dismal-looking rows of 
 blackened vegetables seem to add to the desolation of the 
 scene. Not a tree or a bush stands up against the sky, and 
 and the ancient heaps of powdered slag hide from view even 
 the neighbouring collieries, and the undulating lines of the 
 distant hills of Cannock Chase.
As Sister Dora stood on the doorstep her heart failed her, 
 and she exclaimed: "Oh, take me back! I cannot endure 
 this dreadful place! I had no idea what it would be like 
 when I said I would come here."
  
Her friend, the surgeon, who escorted her, and who was 
 responsible for the epidemic hospital, knew her well; he 
 only said "Come in;" for he was quite sure that she would 
 be delighted with the internal arrangements.
The two wards were large and lofty, and capable of 
 division by sliding doors; the windows barred with iron—a 
 necessary precaution; and excellent ventilation contrived 
 from the roof. Two large day rooms, a good kitchen, a 
 sitting and bedroom in one for the nurse, a tiny one for the 
 porter, and a small dispensary, comprise the whole. Entirely 
 separate are a good laundry, a mortuary, disinfecting oven, 
 and a stable containing an ambulance.
Sister Dora's practical mind was charmed with these 
 arrangements, and she soon told the doctor that she had 
 never seen a place where work would be so delightful, and 
 that the building would spoil her for the Cottage Hospital.
Her work began at once. The twenty-eight beds were 
 soon filled. The only help she had was from the old 
 porter; he was very attentive, but would occasionally go 
 off "on the drink, and leave her alone the whole night 
 with the dead and dying. Two old women from the 
 workhouse shared with her the loathsome washing of 
 clothes and bedding."
It must have been horrible work. Sister Dora, in one of 
 her letters, speaks of the revoltingly dirty condition of some 
 of the patients. "I can only venture to wash their hands 
 and faces in hot water this morning," she writes. She was 
 not without visitors. Her faithful friend, the doctor, brought 
 her books, and flowers, and news from the Cottage Hospital. 
 Old patients called. One of them, an engine-stoker, Chell, 
 came continually to see her. "I could not tell you all 
 her goodness to me, words would fail me if I did," was his 
 remark once. His leg had been crushed in a railway 
 accident, and amputation was necessary. His own words 
 were: "When I come to after the chloroform she was on 
  her knees by my side, with her arm supporting my head, 
 and she was repeating—
'They climbed the steep ascent of heaven
Through peril, toil, and pain;
O God, to us may grace be given
To follow in their train.'
And all through the pain and trouble that I had afterwards 
 I never forgot Sister's voice saying those words." He was in 
 the hospital for fifteen weeks, and had to endure another 
 operation before he left. Sister Dora wrote three resolutions 
 in a pocket-book she gave him:—(1) Come and see Sister 
 Dora once a week; (2) Will go to church more regularly; 
 (3) Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness.
Sister Dora never liked Sunday visitors, because she wished 
 to go to church herself, and was afraid the patients' friends 
 would bring in forbidden food to their friends in her absence; 
 but old patients were allowed to come. No fear of infection 
 could keep Chell from his friend, and others went too.
Poor Sister Dora had her difficulties in the epidemic 
 hospital. "I cannot get a decent woman to come and 
 help," she wrote, "although we pay well. I have got two 
 'critters' from the workhouse; one is so helpless, I have 
 to do the work for her, and the other sits up all night, so 
 can do no more. One man is so delirious, I cannot keep my 
 eye off him, or else he is out of bed. Then I have a baby 
 a year old, and another younger; and they are so cross, 
 they keep up their music day and night." And in another 
 letter later she says: "One man is blind with the pox 
 Another, a woman, is very delirious; she tried to escape 
 last night—it took myself and the porter to hold her down. 
 That fellow is very good; he scrubbed the kitchen floor 
 early this morning to save me.… I am writing while 
 waiting for my potatoes to boil. My bedroom and sitting-room 
 is getting to look quite gay with flowers.… I really 
  wish you could take a peep at me. I am very bright and 
 happy, and like this hospital better than the other. I have 
 all so much under my eye." By-and-by she begged her 
 friend to send her all the old novels they could find, as she 
 was so weary at night that only a real sensational novel 
 would keep her awake.
She had plenty of sensational incidents in her daily work. 
 One night, when the porter was off on the drink, she was 
 left absolutely alone. One of the patients, a Roman Catholic, 
 was dying, and begged to see a priest. She had no one to 
 send, and actually went to the priest's house in the middle 
 of the night, running all the way. The priest was so shocked 
 at her lonely condition that he went to the Town Council 
 the next morning to tell them that help must be procured 
 for the Sister, but they could find no one to go.
Another night, when the porter was away and she was 
 reading to keep herself awake,a delirious patient, a tall, 
 heavy man, sprang out of bed with a loud yell and rushed 
 to the door. Sister Dora did not hesitate she grappled with 
 him at once, although he was covered with the horrible 
 disease, confluent small-pox. She got him back to bed and 
 held him until the doctor arrived. His amazement when he 
 heard of the struggle was great. "Sister Dora could sit up 
 at night and work all day," he observed, "with little or no 
 rest, and as far as I can judge she was neither physically nor 
 mentally the worse for it. Her strength was superhuman— 
 I never saw such a woman." One fact seems almost 
 incredible; it brings a shudder even to read it. "Sister Dora 
 was in the habit of bringing to life patients who had sunk 
 into the first stage of the fatal collapse which often precedes 
 death, by actually putting her mouth to theirs and breathing 
 into them until vitality was restored." It was not until the 
 middle of August 1875 that the last small-pox patient left her, 
 and she returned to Walsall Hospital after six months' 
 absence. Latterly, as her work had lightened, she had 
  visited it for a few hours at a time, after taking proper precautions, 
 as things were in an unsatisfactory state there, and 
 the surgeon had to perform serious operations without her 
 assistance.
She always spoke lovingly of "her dear epidemic hospital;" 
 but though she did not know it, a terrible piece of work was 
 coming to her. In October an explosion of the furnace of 
 the ironworks at Burchill, near Walsall, took place. One 
 man at the top was feeding the fires and eleven others were 
 resting below. The unfortunate men below were covered 
 with molten metal, and in their agony jumped into the canal. 
 They were rescued with difficulty, and, with the exception of 
 one man who wished to be taken home, they were driven to 
 the hospital.
The poor charred bodies hardly seemed to belong to 
 human beings. Some were in terrible agony, others dying 
 painlessly; some cried out to her to dress them at once. "But 
 even among those stricken, tortured creatures there was one 
 heroic soul. The narrative is very touching." One poor man 
 named Phillips—let due honour be done to his memory— 
 seeing how Sister Dora was distracted by the cries for help 
 by which she was surrounded, said, "Sister Dora, I want 
 to be dressed very bad, but if there's any wants you worse 
 go and do them first." He was in intense agony and could 
 only lie on his face; he died in the night. Some lingered 
 for ten days, others longer. The sight and smell were 
 horrible—even the medical men were ill and could hardly 
 stay in the ward; but Sister Dora not only never went to bed 
 those ten days, but stayed in the foul atmosphere and hardly 
 left it day or night. It was the only time she had to fortify 
 herself for her work with brandy. Some people tried to 
 help, but in a few minutes they were sitting on the stairs 
 faint and sick with horror. Two of the men ultimately 
 recovered—one of them the man who was feeding the flames. 
 He was six months in the hospital; his name was Cassidy, he 
  was an Irishman, and he would show his burnt and shrivelled 
 hands and arms as he told his story.
He would describe "Sister Dora going from bed to bed, 
 talking, laughing, and even joking with the poor men, sitting 
 by their bedsides telling stories which she hoped might 
 divert them for a moment from their misery, feeding them 
 with the tenderest care, helping them to bear their pain, and 
 pointing out the way to heaven to those who were appointed 
 to die.…" Every time he said "Sister Dora" he stood up 
 and reverently pulled his forelock, as though he had pronounced 
 the name of a saint or an angel which he was 
 scarce worthy to utter. "What we felt for her I couldn't 
 tell you—my tongue won't say it," he exclaimed.
At the end of the year 1875 the authorities of the Cottage 
 Hospital were in difficulties. The ward where the poor 
 sufferers from the Burchell's explosion had been was hopelessly 
 infected, the whold place impregnated with poison. 
 Erysipelas broke out, wounds would not heal, and it was 
 determined the old hospital should be pulled down and a 
 new and larger one built.
A temporary house in Bridgeman Street was found, but it 
 would only hold ten beds. Sister Dora had to give up 
 taking lady pupils. The situation was a noisy one; it was so 
 close to the railroad that the trains shook the house, and 
 she was obliged to ask the engine-driver not to let out steam 
 close to the hospital as it awakened her patients, "or startled 
 a burnt baby into screams for the rest of the night."
In November 1876, when Sister Dora and her patients 
 were settled in the little home in Bridgeman Street, another 
 mission was held, and she threw herself into the work. 
 She suggested to the missioners that some attempt should 
 be made to rescue the fallen women of the town, and they 
 agreed on condition that she should herself conduct this 
 part of the mission.
On the first night, when the services were over, she guided 
  them into one of the worst slums of Walsall. As they turned 
 into the narrow court, she said to the missioners, "Now 
 keep close behind me. I am safe enough, but your lives 
 are not worth a moment's purchase if you are seen here 
 without me to protect you." Their reception was a rough 
 one. A volley of oaths met them; but Sister Dora was not 
 daunted. She spoke kindly to the women, addressing them 
 by name, then she said, "Now I want you all to go down 
 on your knees with me now, this moment, and say a prayer 
 to God"; and to the astonishment of the clergymen the 
 whole party knelt round her, and after that they followed 
 her into the mission-room, where a short service followed.
For some time after the mission she continued to hold 
 midnight services for these poor women. She also interested 
 herself in the cabdrivers of Walsall, and had meetings or 
 classes for them during the mission.
She had little rest during the mission week. As soon as she 
 had dressed her patients' wounds and put them to bed, she 
 went to her cabmen's gathering. When that was over she 
 must have gone on to her midnight meeting, and yet by 
 6.30 she was up and in the wards. During the winter of 
 1876, Sister Dora, for the first time, found a difficulty in 
 lifting her patients. She had contrived a method of carrying 
 the dead down stairs. She would pass a broad bandage 
 round the corpse, and then tying the ends round her own 
 neck she would take the dead body in her strong arms and 
 carry it down to the mortuary. As the difficulty increased, 
 she consulted a medical man. He examined her carefully, 
 and discovered the existence of a disease that must ultimately 
 prove fatal. He told her that surgical aid might prolong her 
 life, but after consideration she decided to let the disease 
 take its course.
She bound the doctor to secrecy, as she resolved that 
 no one should know her condition, and it was her wish to 
 continue her work as long as possible, and if people knew 
  she was ill or suffering they might harass her with kindly 
 meant remonstrances. She promised to consult him whenever 
 it was necessary, but wished to have no regular medical 
 attendance. It must have been a terrible moment for the 
 heroic worker to hear her death-warrant pronounced. She 
 was apparently in the fulness of health and strength, brimming 
 over with life and spirits; no wonder she needed all 
 her self-control and fortitude. She was doomed, and she 
 knew it; and her resolve was taken at once,—to devote 
 the whole energy of her body and soul to make the utmost 
 of the time left to her.
She worked harder than ever. "I grudge every moment 
 I must spend in taking care of the body," she wrote to a 
 friend who knew nothing of her condition. "I fairly grudge 
 myself the time which must be spent in sleep."
Her little pony-carriage was used nearly every day. 
 From six till ten or eleven at night she drove to see 
 patients who could not be received into the hospital, and 
 her chief happiness was to pass the night beside some 
 dying patient, soothing and comforting the sufferer. The 
 midnight classes for women were still carried on during the 
 winter of 1876.
Her expeditions at night in the cold and wet brought on 
 a return of acute inflammation, and for a short time she was 
 dangerously ill; but kind "Sister Death" refused to take 
 her in her merciful arms, and in spite of her prayers Sister 
 Dora recovered. Who could wonder that she longed to die, 
 and that even her indomitable spirit quailed at the thought 
 of those months of suffering that were before her? But with 
 recovery her courage and cheerfulness returned. The new 
 hospital was being built, and Sister Dora took a great interest 
 in the plans.
She still continued her nocturnal visits, and had some 
 unpleasant experiences. Once, as she was driving to Sutton 
 two ruffians sprang out of the hedge and seized the pony's 
  head, only a man on horseback came round the corner and 
 they ran away.
Another dark night a man with a thick stick rushed after 
 them. The porter, who always drove Sister Dora, whipped 
 up the pony. "I had only time," she said, "for a short 
 prayer, when the stick was brought down heavily on the 
 back of the carriage. I had leant instinctively to one side 
 as I had said my prayer, and so my head escaped the blow 
 that was intended for it." The porter always declared that 
 the ruffians did not know whom they were attacking. He 
 looked upon those drives as some of the jolliest hours of 
 his life. "She never stopped talking," he would say, "and 
 telling me stories."
Her friend, Mr. Twigg, had been dangerously, ill and had 
 gone to Sutton for change of air, and she often visited him 
 there.
Towards the early spring the symptoms of her disease 
 increased so rapidly that, at the urgent request of her doctor 
 she consulted Mr. Crompton of Birmingham, from whose 
 opinion there could be no appeal. He endorsed the opinion 
 of her medical adviser. Though there were no signs of illness 
 about her, the cancer was increasing and surgical dressing 
 became necessary. She attended to the wound herself, and 
 although she had three cases of the same kind under her 
 care whose wounds she regularly dressed, she adhered to 
 her resolution not to seek help.
One night the doctor summoned her to look at a child 
 who was in the last stages of diphtheria. As a last hope he 
 performed the operation of tracheotomy. Sister Dora knelt 
 down by the bed, and putting her mouth to the incision 
 cleared the child's throat of the poisonous mucus. The 
 child recovered, to die of another disease, and Sister Dora 
 had diphtheritic sore throat for three weeks. In June 1878 
 she left for a fortnight's holiday; on her return typhoid fever 
 broke out in the temporary hospital in Bridgeman Street, 
  and it was necessary to close it. She very soon found 
 herself at liberty, and in August she left Walsall, feeling 
 sure that she would never work there again. She joined 
 some of her nieces who were spending the summer in 
 the Isle of Man. She was in high spirits, and the only 
 difference her relatives noticed was she did not walk so far 
 or so fast as she used to do. She taught her nieces to 
 swim, and seemed full of life and health. In the autumn 
 she went to Paris to see the Exhibition, and to study the 
 wonderful inventions in the way of surgical appliances. At 
 the end of September she was in London, where she 
 intended to study Professor Lister's treatment of wounds, 
 with a view of using his method in the hospital. She 
 stayed at a nursing home in Fitzroy Square, where she was 
 permitted to witness his operations. Her own disease was 
 making rapid strides, and her cough increased so terribly 
 that one of the London doctors proposed to examine her 
 chest. In terror that her secret would be discovered by 
 a stranger, she hurried off to Birmingham to consult Mr. 
 Crompton.
Fatigue and anxiety of mind brought on fatal symptoms, 
 and it was thought she would never leave Birmingham 
 alive. Mr. Crompton wished to take her into his own 
 house, but she begged to be moved to Walsall. "Let me 
 die among my own people," was her cry.
The surgeon of the Walsall Hospital removed her in his 
 own carriage, and she was taken to a small house that 
 the committee had hired for her.
She wrote to a dear friend, a clergyman: "I wonder 
 what you will say when you hear the decree has gone out— 
 'Sister, put thy house in order, for thou shalt die and not 
 live.' Such is the verdict of the doctors; such my own 
 feelings this time… I have not had two hours' sleep for 
 four days and nights, but in the midst of the fiery furnace 
 there was a form like unto the Son of God. …"
  
Sister Dora still enjoined secrecy on her doctors, and 
 it was commonly believed that she was dying of consumption. 
 "Her'll get well," the people said, "her 
 never can be going to die"; but this conviction was 
 followed by despair, when, in answer to their anxious 
 inquiries, they received the answer, "No hope—only a 
 question of time."
Sister Dora had hoped that she might recover sufficiently 
 to be able to be carried to the door of the new hospital, 
 which was nearly completed, to declare it open with her 
 own lips; but this last hope vanished. After her return to 
 Walsall she never left her bed. Her sufferings increased. 
 She soon was unable to take solid food, and incessant 
 sickness set in. She could only obtain sleep by the use of 
 opiates, until at last they ceased to have effect. Her 
 old servant, Mrs. H., with the help of two other night-nurses, 
 nursed her through the night, and she was obliged 
 at last to let Mrs. H. dress her wound when the doctor was 
 not available to help her do it herself. She would not send 
 for any of her own family. When two of her sisters went 
 to Walsall for a week, in her morbid desire for concealment 
 she would not allow them to nurse her, and they were 
 obliged to leave her. Even on her deathbed her proud 
 reticence and strong will prevailed. She told her doctors 
 she would not give people the opportunity of "saying that 
 she killed herself by her mode of life," and as long as 
 possible she hid her physical suffering.
The approach of death—merciful death—was only a joy 
 to her. She had struggled so hard for twenty months, and 
 she was so worn out and weary. But this joy and relief was 
 followed by deep depression, and "a horrible dread" of 
 dying oppressed her. "I cannot pray, I cannot think; I 
 sadly fear I shall be lost," were her words: "I can only 
 trust." But even in this darkness her faith enabled her to 
 cling to the cross, though her bright, hopeful spirit seemed 
  quenched in those deep waters. "I am in God's hands 
 now," was her cry.
Her one earthly anxiety was to find some one competent 
 to take charge of the new hospital. To her relief a 
 friend and former lady pupil promised to undertake the 
 nursing until a permanent head could be found, and on 
 November 4th the hospital was opened in Sister Dora's 
 name. She took great delight in the silver key in a velvet 
 case which was sent to her by the committee.
Whenever she rallied, she showed her old interest in her 
 friends' welfare. Her old patients who came to see her were 
 received with beaming smiles, though perhaps a few minute 
 before she had been groaning with pain. Some of them said 
 "she was that cheerful and jolly that they were sure she 
 would come round."
When her sufferings increased, and she could not pray for 
 herself, she would beg her nurse to pray aloud. "I am not 
 half so good and patient as many of those I have nursed," 
 she would say.
Towards the end of November she grew suddenly worse, 
 and then rallied again, to the amazement of her doctors. 
 The measure of her pain and discipline was not yet full. 
 One who was constantly with her wrote: "I shall never 
 forget the unselfishness, brightness, and patience with which 
 she bore her long trial. Her sufferings were sad to see; but 
 even when she was moaning with pain, which she said was 
 like the cutting of a knife, she would go on dictating (her 
 letters) as best she could between her moans.… Her 
 sorrow was that she could not realise God's presence more, 
 and her fear was, lest she should seem impatient.… I 
 feel that I cannot give you any true idea of those last hours 
 that I spent with her, as her brave and loving spirit waited 
 for the moment when God would call her to the full, 
 unclouded daylight of eternity, into the dawn of which she 
 seemed already to have entered."
  
During the last three weeks of her life the course of 
 circulation in her right arm became impeded, and it swelled 
 so painfully that it had to be supported with a cushion. 
 In addition to her other complaint, she suffered from 
 consolidation of the right lung, which caused impeded 
 respiration and distressing cough. But as she sat propped 
 up by pillows she seemed to regain her youthful beauty, 
 and only the touch of white in her hair testified to her age. 
 On Saturday, December 21st, the end seemed approaching, 
 and Sister Dora's depression increased; it was the last time, 
 and her faith triumphed. "I never saw such faith and 
 patience," was the testimony of one of her nurses. On the 
 morning of the 24th she said, "I am dying; run for Sister 
 Ellen." In the biography we read that her faithful attendant 
 "Mrs. H. tried to soothe her, saying, 'Our Blessed Lord is 
 standing at the gates of heaven to open them for you.' But 
 she no longer needed such consolation, for all her darkness 
 was gone, and she answered, 'I see Him there; the gates 
 are opened wide.'… When all human efforts for her relief 
 were exhausted," it continues, "she said, as they stood 
 watching her, 'I have lived alone; let me die alone,' repeating 
 'let me die alone,' till they were forced to leave her, 
 one friend only watching through the half-open door."
They laid her to rest in Walsall Cemetery on December 28th. 
 No one who was present will ever forget that sight. In spite 
 of half-melting snow and drizzling rain, hundreds of old 
 patients followed, until almost the whole of the population 
 seemed to join the procession. There were four workhouse 
 funerals at the same time, and the service was read over all 
 five at once. There was no room in the chapel, and Sister 
 Dora's coffin was placed in the porch; as one of the nurses 
 remarked, "that was just as Sister Dora would have wished— 
 not to be divided, even in death, from the poor people she 
 loved so well." The inscription on the coffin was: "Sister 
 Dora. Entered into rest 24th December, 1878." Her 
  great wish to sing her Christmas carol in heaven had been 
 granted her.
Seldom has a more beautiful life been lived upon this 
 earth. It was spent in the service of Christ's poor, in 
 ministering to the sick, the sorrowful, and the sinful. Can 
 we doubt that to her the blessed words have been said: 
 "Inasmuch as ye did it unto the least of these My brethren, 
 ye did it unto Me."
