dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Creighton_Some Famous Women  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
XI
SISTER DORA
Dorothy Pattison, who was afterwards known as Sister 
 Dora, was born in 1832 in a little village called Hauxwell, 
 near Richmond, in Yorkshire, of which her father 
 was the rector. She was the youngest but one of a 
 family of twelve children, of whom ten were daughters. 
 They grew up in all the enjoyment of country life. 
 Dorothy was delicate as a child and not allowed to do 
 regular lessons, but she describes herself as having all 
 the same been a great romp, as wild and merry as a 
 boy, and good at all outdoor sports—riding, rowing, 
 shooting, swimming, and skating. But even as a tiny 
 child she loved to wash and nurse her dolls, and longed 
 to be able to do the same for real people. When she 
 talked over the future with her nearest sister she used 
 to say, "I'll be a nurse or a lady doctor and do everything 
 for my patients." When she was twelve, one of 
 her sisters fell ill, and Dorothy begged, at first in vain, 
 to be allowed to sit up with her and nurse her, but at 
 last she managed to slip into the room unnoticed, and 
 once she was there, she was allowed to stay and helped 
 to nurse her sister till she was well. A couple of years 
 afterwards a fever broke out in the village, and an old 
 woman whom Dorothy knew very well took it. She 
 called at the house to ask how she was and found the 
 old woman left quite alone. In a moment, she made 
  up her mind, and without thinking of what her parents 
 might say, she hung up her coat and jacket behind the 
 door and told the old woman she had come to stay 
 with her. In the evening she sent a message home to 
Sister Dora.
Photo: Mrs. Williams, Wolverhampton.
 say that she was going to stay all night, and word came 
 back that, as she had chosen to stay without permission, 
 she must now remain with the old woman. She washed 
 her and nursed her and read the Bible to her, but she 
 grew worse and worse, and the next night she died. A 
  kind neighbour came in and helped to lay her out, but 
 Dorothy, tired out and frightened, was left to spend the 
 night alone in the cottage. Next morning she sent a 
 message to the Rectory to say that the poor woman 
 had died, might she come home. But the answer came 
 back, "Stay where you are till you are sent for." She 
 was terrified lest her parents had cast her off and 
 she should never be allowed to go home. But soon 
 a carriage arrived with her old nurse to carry her off 
 to spend a month at the seaside, so that she might be 
 free from all infection before going home. When at 
 last she returned home she was welcomed as a little 
 heroine, and got rather puffed up by the praise she 
 received.
As she got stronger and able to study more, she was 
 inclined to rebel at the time spent over lessons, and 
 said she did not see why, as she was going to be a nurse, 
 she should learn languages and music. But she was 
 told that a nice Christian nurse should learn everything 
 she had time for; she might some day have French or 
 German patients, and music would be a pleasure to 
 everybody; it would not do to be one-sided, for she 
 ought to be able to care for the minds and souls of her 
 patients as well as for their bodies. So she was persuaded 
 to study gladly, and would often wonder how 
 the thing she was learning would come in afterwards. 
 Later she found that there was not a single thing she 
 had learnt which had not in some way been hallowed 
 in the service of God. She used to say to others, 
 "Never feel that it is waste of time to get knowledge 
 of any kind; you can never tell how handy it may 
 come in."
Dora grew up to be a very handsome woman. By the 
 time she was twenty, all her delicacy had disappeared 
  and she was tall and strong. She had very high 
 spirits and was always full of fun and ready to see 
 the funny side of people and things. Her laughter 
 and her happy voice, singing as she went about the 
 house, were the delight of her father, who called her his 
 sunshine. But though she loved her home and her 
 rides and walks on the moors, she did not find there 
 enough occupation for her active nature. Her mother 
 died after a long time of ill-health, during which Dora 
 had been one of her devoted nurses, and now Dora 
 longed for some real work. Her father did not wish 
 her to leave home, but he did not forbid it, and at last 
 when she was twenty-nine, Dora went to be schoolmistress 
 at Woolston, a little village in Buckinghamshire. 
 She lived there alone in a tiny cottage, loving 
 the children who came to her school, and making herself 
 the friend of all the poor and sick in the village. She 
 did not feel, however, that this was her real work; and 
 after three years she decided to join the Sisterhood of 
 the Good Samaritans. She had learnt to know these 
 Sisters in Yorkshire, as they had their chief home at 
 Coatham, which was not very far from her old home. 
 The Sisters had a Convalescent Home under their care, 
 and many of them went out from Coatham to work in 
 other towns.
After she joined the Sisterhood, Sister Dora, as she 
 was now called, had to work very hard. The Sisters 
 did all the work of the house, and Sister Dora cleaned 
 floors and grates, swept and dusted, and for a time 
 acted as cook. She sometimes felt it very hard to 
 have to do all this work. Once when a gentleman 
 whom she knew came into the kitchen where she was 
 peeling potatoes, she pulled her hood over her face so 
 that he might not see her. In after life she found the 
  great advantage of having learnt how to do all the 
 work of a house herself. She thought some of the 
 rules very strict; but still she was very happy there, 
 and the Sisters loved her. She was able also to learn 
 more about nursing, as the Sisters had a Cottage 
 Hospital near Middlesborough, to which she was sent. 
 Sometimes, too, she was sent to nurse private patients, 
 and sometimes to nurse in another Cottage Hospital 
 for accidents at Walsall, which was managed by the 
 Coatham Sisters.
At last Sister Dora settled altogether at Walsall, in 
 charge of the little hospital there. Walsall is a great 
 manufacturing centre, with coal pits, blast furnaces, and 
 many kinds of factories. It had then no large hospital; 
 the little Cottage Hospital was chiefly intended for 
 accidents, and the patients were for the most part men 
 and boys from the pits and workshops. There were 
 also a large number of out-patients, men, women, and 
 children. As most of the cases were accidents, Sister 
 Dora was particularly anxious to become a good surgical 
 nurse, and the chief surgeon at the hospital, when he 
 saw how quick and clever she was, taught her all that 
 he could, so that she could attend to many cases herself 
 without the help of the doctor. The hospital in which 
 she at first nursed was very small and inconvenient, 
 with only fourteen beds, but a few years after Sister 
 Dora settled in Walsall a new hospital was built on the 
 top of the hill on which the town lies. It had twenty-eight 
 beds, conveniently arranged in three wards, so 
 that it was just possible for an active woman like Sister 
 Dora to do all the nursing herself. She had the help 
 of an old servant of her family, who came to live with 
 her and who soon learnt to be a very capable nurse 
 herself. Other women were engaged to sit up at night 
  with the patients, and, later, Sister Dora used to have 
 lady pupils who learnt nursing under her.
It was a very hard life, full of ceaseless work and 
 responsibility, but Sister Dora threw her whole heart 
 into it, and loved her work and the people for whom 
 she worked. Once settled at Walsall, she never wished 
 to leave it. Speaking to a friend about her work, she 
 said, "I generally find that the more I have to do the 
 stronger and happier I feel. It is hard enough sometimes 
 at night, when I have been round to all the 
 patients and left them comfortable and asleep, and am 
 just going to bed myself, to be called down by the bell, 
 or perhaps roused by it just as I am falling asleep. 
 But then I think 'the Master calleth thee,' and jump 
 up and go down, to find perhaps some poor drunken 
 man or woman, and it is difficult to recognise the 
 Master in such poor degraded creatures as come to be 
 doctored up." She had a wonderful power over the 
 men and boys amongst whom she worked. She sympathised 
 deeply with all their pain and trouble, and 
 made them feel as if their troubles were her own, but 
 she tried to make them forget their pain by her bright 
 talk and her laughter and jokes. She would raise their 
 spirits by her delightful fun, till an Irishman said once, 
 "Make you laugh! she'd make you laugh when you 
 were dying." Whenever she had a spare minute, she 
 would read to them or talk to them or play games with 
 them. She allowed no bad talk or quarrelling in the 
 wards, and tried to mend her patients' morals as well as 
 their limbs. They each of them knew that they had a 
 real friend in her, and that she prayed for each and 
 cared deeply what became of them. They loved to 
 come and see her after they had left the hospital, and 
 were always sure of a welcome. She tried hard to cure 
  them from their drinking ways, showing them again 
 and again how hard it was to heal the wounds of those 
 who drank; and when they were brought in at night 
 wounded after a drunken brawl, after dressing their 
 wounds with all her usual gentleness, she would ask 
 them why they did not behave like respectable members 
 of society, instead of fighting in the streets and getting 
 her up at unearthly hours of the night to mend their 
 broken heads.
Sister Dora was devoted to children and they loved 
 her, and she knew how to get them to bear patiently 
 the dressing of their wounds. Often when a child was 
 miserable and in pain, she would carry it about with 
 her on one arm as she went through the wards, saying, 
 "Don't you cry, Sister's got you," whilst with her other 
 hand she attended to the patients. Many children 
 suffering from terrible burns used to be brought to 
 the hospital, and she grew so clever in treating them 
 that the surgeons trusted them entirely to her care. 
 Once a child was brought in so badly burnt that it 
 was plain it had only a few hours to live. All pain 
 had ceased, but the child was terrified. Sister Dora 
 gave up all other work in order to comfort her. She 
 sat by the bed for some hours talking to her about 
 Jesus Christ and His love for little children, and about 
 heaven where she would never feel hunger and pain 
 again. The child grew peaceful and happy, and her 
 last words were, "When you come to heaven, Sister, 
 I'll meet you at the gates with a bunch of flowers."
Sister Dora felt special sympathy for the men who 
 had been so hurt that it seemed necessary for them 
 to have an arm or leg cut off. She knew well how 
 difficult this made it for them to earn a livelihood, and 
 she devoted all her skill to saving the wounded limb 
  if possible. One night a fine healthy young man was 
 brought in with his arm torn and twisted by a machine. 
 The doctor said that nothing could save it, and that 
 he must cut it off at once. Sister Dora was moved 
 by the despair of the poor man; she looked long at 
 his arm and at himself, and the man cried out, "O 
 Sister! save my arm for me; it's my right arm." When 
 she turned to the doctor and asked if she might try 
 to save the arm, he only asked her if she was mad, and 
 said that the man's life could not be saved unless his 
 arm were taken off at once. But she turned to the 
 patient and said, "Are you willing for me to try to 
 save your arm, my man?" He was willing, but the 
 surgeon was very angry, and refused to help her, saying, 
 "Remember, it's your arm," and telling her she must 
 take all the responsibility. Night and day for three 
 weeks she tended him, naturally feeling terribly anxious 
 as to what would happen. She often said afterwards, 
 "How I prayed over that arm." At the end of that 
 time she asked the surgeon to come and look at her 
 work, and when she unbandaged the arm and showed 
 it to him, straightened and in a healthy, promising 
 condition, he exclaimed, "Why you have saved it, and 
 it will be a useful arm to him for many a long year." 
 It is not surprising that Sister Dora wept with joy at 
 her success, nor that the man became one of her 
 most devoted admirers. He was nicknamed "Sister's 
 Arm" in the hospital, and used to come back often 
 to see her after he had left.
Another man himself tells how she had to persuade 
 him to allow his leg to be taken off as the only way of 
 saving his life. He had grown so thin and wasted that 
 she used to carry him upstairs in her arms so that he 
 might join in the prayers she held for the whole 
  hospital. He was eight months in the hospital, and he 
 says, "I learned to love Sister Dora as a mother." He 
 tells how she used in the afternoons to attend to the 
 out-patients, "dress their wounds, set a broken arm, 
 sew up a cut, or draw teeth, in fact anything that was 
 required of her she would do, and always with the 
 tenderest care and the kindest word to all." She often 
 amused the men with tales of her doings in the country 
 as a girl, and told them about her riding and fox-hunting, 
 and this man who watched her life in the 
 hospital for eight months says, "those patients who 
 were the most trouble, she seemed the fondest of." She 
 knew how to get the men to help her by making them 
 wait upon one another; generally there was some boy 
 who had to stay a long while in the hospital, who 
 waited upon her as a devoted slave. After she had 
 been four years at the hospital, to show their gratitude 
 for all she had done, her patients subscribed fifty 
 pounds amongst themselves with which they bought a 
 small carriage and pony for her. She delighted in 
 using it to send convalescents for a drive, and found it 
 a help in taking her to visit sick people in their homes. 
 She seldom took a holiday herself, and once was three 
 years at the hospital without any break, but if she 
 did go away into the country with friends, she enjoyed 
 everything with all her old energy, bathing or 
 skating, taking long walks, when she would lead the 
 way in scaling fences or fording streams. Sometimes 
 she took patients who were convalescent for expeditions 
 into the country or to visit Lichfield Cathedral. 
 The old patients specially loved to revisit the hospital 
 on Sundays, when, after a clergyman had held a short 
 service, Sister Dora used to speak to them herself, 
 and then lead them in the singing of many hymns.
  
She always had a small Bible in her pocket, and 
 studied it whenever she had a spare minute.
In 1875 there was a terrible outbreak of smallpox in 
 Walsall. There was an isolation hospital on the outskirts 
 of the town, but in those days people were not 
 compelled by law to send smallpox patients away, and 
 they refused to go of their own accord, for they said 
 that they would rather die at home. It was very 
 necessary for the welfare of the town that they should 
 be persuaded to go to the hospital and not spread the 
 terrible infection by staying in their own homes. So 
 Sister Dora offered to leave her hospital and go to 
 take charge of the Smallpox Hospital. She knew that 
 the people trusted her, and thought that they would 
 come if she was there. Her offer was gladly accepted; 
 all through the town the news ran, "Sister is going to 
 the Epidemic Hospital." Her lady pupils were left 
 to take charge of the hospital, and she went off to her 
 lonely work with the surgeon of the hospital to show 
 her the way. It seemed such a lonely and desolate 
 spot that even her courage failed her at the door, and 
 she cried out, "Oh take me back, I cannot endure this 
 dreadful place." But the surgeon knew her real courage, 
 and only said, "Come in." It was an admirably 
 planned little hospital, and she was delighted with it. 
 There were twenty-eight beds, and she had not been 
 half-an-hour in the hospital before seven patients 
 arrived, to be followed by many more. Her only 
 regular helper was the porter, an old man, who did all 
 he could for her when he was sober, but used sometimes 
 to go away and get drunk, leaving her alone for the 
 whole night. Two old women came in from the 
 workhouse to help her in washing the clothes and 
 bedding, but much of the scrubbing and cleaning she 
  had to do herself, as well as all the nursing. One of 
 the police who came to see her told her that the people 
 in the town declared they should not mind having 
 the smallpox with "Sister" to nurse them. Some few 
 people were brave enough to visit her in her loneliness, 
 and to bring her books and flowers and news of her 
 patients at the hospital.
One of the old patients, an engine-stoker, went often 
 to see her after his day's work was done. He had been 
 twice in the hospital under her care, and he said, "I 
 could not tell you all her goodness to me, words would 
 fail me if I tried." She was full of courage and joy in 
 her work, and wrote to a friend: "You must not fret. 
 I rejoice that He has permitted one so unworthy to 
 work for Him; and oh, if He should think me fit to lay 
 down my life for Him, rejoice, rejoice, at so great a 
 privilege." Even her sense of fun did not leave her, 
 and she wrote a long letter to her old patients at the 
 Cottage Hospital, calling them all by their nicknames 
 and sending messages to each. She said of a boy who 
 was her special slave: "What shall I say to my beloved 
 Sam. I wish I had my boy here. I send him twenty 
 kisses and hope he has been in church to-day and in 
 time. He must not sulk all the time I am away. I 
 have two blessed babies, who alternately keep up music 
 all day and night, accompanied by an Irishwoman's 
 tongue, so I am not dull. Have you been singing today? 
 You must sing particularly, 'Safe in the arms 
 of Jesus' and think of me. Living or dying, I am 
 His. Oh, my children, you all love me for the very 
 little I do for you; but oh, if you would only think 
 what Jesus has done, and is doing for you, your hearts 
 would soon be full of love for Him, and you would all 
 choose Him for your Master."
  
Towards the middle of May, the Smallpox Hospital 
 was empty and she hoped soon to leave; but before she 
 was ready to go new patients were brought in, and this 
 happened several times, so that it was not till the 
 middle of August, after six months' work at the Smallpox 
 Hospital, that she was able to close it.
The following October a terrible explosion occurred 
 at the furnace of some ironworks, and eleven men were 
 covered with streams of molten metal. In their agony 
 they jumped into a neighbouring canal, and were with 
 difficulty rescued and taken in cabs to the hospital. 
 Burnt all over and frightfully disfigured, they were 
 carried in and laid on the floor till a ward could be 
 cleared for them. It was a terrible scene, even the 
 doctors could hardly stay in the ward, but Sister Dora 
 never ceased in her devoted care of the men. Cries 
 came from most of them, "Sister, come and dress me." 
 "Do dress me," "Oh, you don't know how bad I am." 
 She could only answer, "Oh my poor men, I'll dress you 
 all, if you'll give me time." One poor man, seeing how 
 distracted she was by the different cries for help, said, 
 "Sister Dora, I want to be dressed very bad, but if 
 there's any wants you worse go and do them first." He 
 was in terrible pain and died during the night. Of the 
 eleven only two recovered. Some lingered for as long 
 as ten days, and during that time Sister Dora never 
 went to bed, and hardly left the ward. One of those 
 who survived described how she went from bed to 
 bed talking, laughing, even joking with the men; 
 telling them stories, doing everything she could to 
 distract them from their pain, and pointing out the 
 way to heaven to those who were to die. He spoke 
 with delight of her visits to his bedside at night when 
 he was recovering, saying, "It did you good only to 
  look at her," and ending with, "What we felt for her I 
 couldn't tell you; my tongue won't say it."
One result of this terrible accident was that the ward 
 in which the burnt men had lain was so poisoned that 
 it could not be used again, and it was decided to build 
 a new hospital. In the meanwhile, a house was fitted 
 up as a temporary hospital. It was a tiring life for 
 Sister Dora, as the temporary hospital was small and 
 not at all convenient, and many patients had to be 
 nursed in their own homes. It was at this time that 
 she first began to find it difficult to lift her patients, 
 and after a while she was compelled to consult a doctor 
 about her health. He discovered that she had a mortal 
 malady. It was possible that an operation might do 
 her some good, but it was by no means certain. She 
 determined to go on as usual, and made him promise to 
 tell no one of her illness. She worked harder than 
 ever and would not give in. She drove about in her 
 little pony carriage to visit her patients, and no one 
 was allowed to know that anything was wrong with her. 
 Then an outbreak of fever in the temporary hospital 
 made it necessary to close it, and as the new hospital 
 was not yet ready it was possible for Sister Dora to 
 leave Walsall. She visited her relations and went to 
 Paris and London to study improvements in surgical 
 science. All the time her disease was growing worse, 
 and still she told no one. Her wish was to die at 
 Walsall amongst her own people, and as the hospital 
 was not ready, a little house near to it was taken for 
 her. People could not believe that she was dying. She 
 was surrounded with all the care that love could give 
 her, and often her visitors were surprised to see her, in 
 spite of pain and weakness, still her old self, full of fun 
 and jokes. Her interest in the new hospital was very 
  
The Statue at Walsall
  keen, and she rejoiced that it was finished in time for 
 her to know of its opening. She listened eagerly to all 
 that was told her about it, and gave her advice about 
 all the arrangements. Often she suffered terribly, and 
 when at last she died, on Christmas eve, 1878, it was 
 with relief that her friends heard that her pain was 
 over. She was carried to her grave by some of the 
 railway men for whom she had cared with so much 
 devotion. The Bishop was there and great numbers 
 of the clergy, and there came, too, hundreds of her 
 patients and an immense crowd consisting of nearly 
 all the people of the town.
When, later, it was discussed what memorial of her 
 should be placed in Walsall some suggested a Convalescent 
 Home, as what she herself would most have 
 desired; but the working men of the town were quite 
 clear that what they wanted was a statue of Sister Dora. 
 One of them said that of course they could not forget 
 her, but that they wanted her to be there, so that when 
 strangers came and saw the statue and asked who it 
 was, they might answer, "Who's that? Why that's our 
 Sister Dora." So her statue in her nurse's dress, as she 
 lived and worked amongst them, stands in the centre 
 of Walsall to remind the people of her life of love. 
 The workmen spoke of her as "the most saintly thing 
 that was ever given us."
