dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Darton_Heroism of Christian Women  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
SISTER DORA. 
 [THE GOOD SAMARITAN.]
Dorothy wyndlow patteson was born 
 at the village of Hauxwell, a very small village 
 near Richmond, Yorkshire, on January 10th, 1832. Her 
 father, the Rev. Mark Patteson, was for many years 
 rector of Hauxwell; while her mother was the daughter 
 of a Richmond banker. Dorothy (the name she preferred) 
 was the youngest but one of twelve children, two 
 sons and ten daughters. From her mother she inherited 
 uncommon beauty of features, and to her father may be 
 traced her imposing figure and dignified bearing.
Until her fourteenth year she was a very delicate 
 child, with little promise of that remarkable physical 
 development, great endurance in performing herculean 
 labours, and intense strength, which she subsequently 
 attained. On account of her health she was not allowed 
 to do lessons regularly like other children; but though 
 left to follow her bent with less restraint and discipline 
 than fell to the lot of the elder children of the household, 
 still the atmosphere of good breeding and the 
  natural exuberance of youthful gaiety around her from 
 her birth constituted educational influences of a high and 
 healthy character.
Dora learnt instinctively, growing into habits of minute 
 observation, and quietly storing up in her retentive 
 memory what she saw and heard. From the very first, 
 too, her strong will and indomitable perseverance were 
 manifest. Her biographer * 
* 
"Biography of Sister Dora," by Margaret Lonsdale. (Kegan Paul, Paternoster Square, 
London.)
 says:—
"If she could not get her own way easily, she did not 
 give it up, or take refuge in sulks or in an outbreak of 
 temper, like most children; rather the meeting with 
 opposition seemed to stimulate her active mind to find 
 a device for getting her way somehow." The following 
 is one of her own stories in illustration of this:—
She and her sister had what they were pleased to 
 consider extremely ugly velvet bonnets for Sunday wear. 
 Complaints, however, were useless, and Dorothy set her 
 brains to work to accomplish her end. One very rainy 
 day the children knew that their mother had gone out 
 for a long drive. Dorothy ran to her sister, and said, 
 "Be quick; now's our chance of spoiling our bonnets." 
 They fetched the obnoxious articles and put them on, 
 threw open the library window, put their heads well out, 
 and let the rain work its worst upon the velvet. Then, 
 at Dora's suggestion, and not at all to hide what they 
 had done, but merely to complete the operation, they 
  put the bonnets away, soaking wet as they were, into 
 their boxes. Sunday morning came: where were the 
 bonnets? Dora replied firmly, "Quite spoilt; we can 
 never wear them any more." They were condemned, 
 however, to wear them; and not on that Sunday alone, 
 but for many Sundays afterwards, they appeared in 
 church with the monuments of failure upon their 
 heads.
At fourteen she had a most serious illness, and during 
 the long months of weariness and pain she seemed to be 
 developing the power, so invaluable to her in later life, 
 not only of bearing pain, but of always looking on the 
 bright side of things. She had, too, even thus early, 
 "an everlasting flow of animal spirits, bubbling over in 
 fun, and a keen sense of the humorous side of things in 
 general." This, together with her extraordinary fortitude, 
 stood her in good stead during her peculiarly 
 active and self-sacrificing life, when she voluntarily bore 
 for other's sakes burdens that would have crushed the 
 majority of persons; though it sometimes caused her to 
 be misunderstood by those who failed to see how closely 
 her rippling laughter was allied to tenderest pity and to 
 tears, its undertone of rich melody being freighted and 
 vibrating with her exhaustless sympathy.
From this period (her fourteenth year) to her twentieth 
 she rapidly grew in vigour and health, engaging in active 
 outdoor exercises, so that she became noted for her skill 
 in various boyish games, and was quite famous for her 
 daring as a horsewoman. Her eldest brother at this 
  time made her his frequent companion, and with him 
 she studied the classics and mathematics, writing at his 
 dictation, copying for him, and entering, as through her 
 life it was her habit to do, with unfailing zest and ardour 
 into all that she undertook. Many a time in after years, 
 she delighted the hearts of her patients by stories of 
 her rides across the wild Yorkshire moorlands, firing 
 especially the imagination of the big boys, who, with 
 their ready admiration for display of physical courage, 
 were irresistibly fascinated by a woman in whom they 
 saw combined resolution of body and mind.
Those who knew her at this period say that her 
 personal beauty was very remarkable. She was tall and 
 slender, about five feet seven inches in height, and 
 perfectly well made. Her hands were small and exquisitely 
 formed; her features nearly perfect in their 
 regularity, and the forehead wide and high. She had 
 dark tightly-curling brown hair, waving all over her 
 head, which no amount of cutting off or covering with 
 caps could ever smooth; and the softness and roundness 
 of youth, the extreme delicacy of her whole colouring 
 and complexion, added to the liveliness of her expression, 
 made her a fascinating creature to look upon.
Her family were in affluent circumstances, but were 
 distinguished by their devotion to the sick, the poor, and 
 the suffering. It was usual among the sisters to plan 
 how they could make their clothes last as long as possible, 
 how they could save from their travelling expenses, 
 or how deny themselves at the table, that they might be 
  able to give away more generously than they were able 
 to without the self-denial.
As little children no reward could be offered them so 
 great as to be permitted to perform some deed of love, 
 and this feeling grew stronger in Dora. For her there 
 was no pleasure in the world equal to that of service 
 —the service of the sad, the suffering, the sinful and the 
 repulsive. The nine years after twenty were so beautifully 
 spent in her home that her father called her his 
 "Sunshine." She faithfully attended upon her mother's 
 failing strength, and watched beside her death-bed.
Her enthusiasm and spirit of adventure were first 
 thoroughly moved by Florence Nightingale's heroic work 
 during the Crimean War. She wanted to join the band 
 of women who went out as nurses, and implored her 
 father to let her go; but he wisely refused, telling her 
 that, untrained and undisciplined as she was, she would 
 be worse than useless, adding that she had enough to 
 employ her at home if she would only think so.
But she felt that she could not be contented any 
 longer at home, that a voice Divine was summoning her 
 forth to labour. She felt compelled to go. To her had 
 come that call which many a soul hears: "Wist ye not 
 that I must be about my Father's business?" Her 
 beginning was a very humble one. In October, 1861, 
 Dora Patteson, in reply to an advertisement, finally 
 quitted the shelter of the home-roof, and became a 
 village schoolmistress in the parish of Little Woolston, 
 near Bletchley, on the borders of Buckinghamshire.
  
Here she not only taught her children at school, but 
 she followed them to their homes, nursed them when 
 they were unwell, and visited their parents and others of 
 the poor and sick in the village. That she might have 
 the more to spare for the needy, she accustomed herself 
 to do all her own household work, and the people in the 
 neighbourhood were at first "astonished to find Miss 
 Patteson blacking her grate when they came to see her," 
 but they afterwards learned to appreciate her generous 
 motives, and love her for her rare consideration. For 
 three years she continued to work at Woolston under 
 the vicar's direction, living in a small cottage, regardless 
 of any society. But she was not altogether satisfied 
 with the nature of her work, or the character of her surroundings.
Dora's loneliness in her cottage was at times disturbed, 
 and on one occasion she had an unpleasant adventure 
 with a burglar.
One day, when she happened to be at home, an ill-looking 
 man came to beg, and she noticed that he took 
 a critically observant look round her little kitchen. 
 That evening she went to sit up with a man in the 
 village who was dangerously ill. He died in the course 
 of the night, and as Dora was returning home through 
 the fields, between one and two o'clock, she saw a 
 bright light burning in her kitchen. She unlocked the 
 door just in time to recognise the same man who had 
 begged of her in the daytime, and to see him making 
 his escape through the window of the adjoining room 
  with all her small collection of silver spoons and forks 
 which she had brought from home, and a teapot which 
 she especially valued. She never discovered any trace 
 either of the thief or of her property.
Having neglected a severe cold which she had taken, 
 she broke down in health, and by the advice of her 
 friends went to Redcar, on the Yorkshire coast, for 
 change and restoration. Here, as she got better, her 
 insatiable desire for work returned, and to gratify her 
 taste for nursing, she entered the Sisterhood of the Good 
 Samaritans, whose headquarters were at Coatham, near 
 Redcar, but who were engaged in various works of 
 mercy in different parts of England. Here she underwent 
 an exceptionally severe course of training, shrinking 
 from no hardship, stooping to the pettiest details, 
 and choosing danger and hardship rather than ease. At 
 length she was sent to the small cottage hospital at 
 North Ormesby, near Middlesbrough, where she worked 
 sometimes alone, sometimes with other sisters who were 
 in charge.
Early in 1865 Sister Dora was sent to Walsall, to 
 help in nursing at a small cottage hospital recently 
 established there, and at that period under the charge 
 of the sisterhood to which she was attached.
Walsall then contained about 35,000 inhabitants, and 
 lay on the borders of the great coal and iron district 
 in South Staffordshire, called by the very expressive 
 name of "The Black Country." At night the spectator 
 seems to be transported into the infernal regions, where 
  the blinding glare of blast furnaces, the snorting of 
 engines, the ponderous thud of steam-hammers, and the 
 clang and whiz and whirr of the machinery, sounds 
 which never cease, but which are less noticed during 
 the day, bewilder the senses. Little swarthy, half-naked 
 pigmies (for so they appear by the side of the gigantic 
 fires) come and go in the flashing light like demons 
 dancing round their unquenchable flames. Forests of 
 tall chimneys of every variety of shape vomit forth 
 volumes of smoke and fierce tongues of flame. When 
 Sister Dora commenced work in this locality the men 
 were described as many of them professing no religious 
 belief whatsoever, and the women as leading hard lives 
 of drudgery, drunkenness and immorality being scarcely 
 looked upon as a disgrace.
Here, then, Dora set to work with characteristic 
 energy, and early caught small-pox from the patients; 
 but even in her delirium she showed the bent of her 
 mind by occupying herself in tearing up her sheets into 
 bandages. At this time the Walsall people were not 
 only suspicious of the sisters, erroneously supposing 
 them to be members of a Roman Catholic institution, 
 but actually persecuted them with such material arguments 
 as stones and mud. Their patience and tenderness 
 at length, however, began to bear fruit, and almost 
 the last instance of active opposition fell upon Sister 
 Dora. This is the story as related by her biographer:—
"At the time of the celebrated Murphy riots Dora 
 was walking, rather late one evening, through the town 
  to visit a patient, when a lad from the other side of 
 the road called out, '
There goes one of those sisters of 
 misery!
' and threw a stone which cut open her forehead. 
 Not long afterwards this same young fellow was brought 
 into the hospital, having met with a severe injury in a 
 coal-pit. Sister Dora, who never forgot a face, recognised 
 him at once, saying to herself, 'That's my man.' 
 He was some time under her care, and she bestowed 
 upon him probably more than usual attention. One 
 night, when he was recovering, she found him quietly 
 crying. 'I wouldn't ask him what was the matter,' 
 Sister Dora said, when relating the incident, 'because 
 I knew well enough, and I wanted him to confess.' 
 At length it came out, with many sobs, 'Sister, I threw 
 that stone at you.' 'Oh,' she replied, 'did you think 
 I did not know that? Why, I knew you the very first 
 minute you came in at the door.' 'What!' he exclaimed, 
 'you knew me, and have been nursing me 
 like this?' It was his first practical experience of good 
 returned for evil, and he did not know what to make 
 of it."
She was regarded by the rough men who occupied 
 the wards from time to time as an angel of light, and 
 if it was possible she would always give them their tea 
 with her own hand. Who could ask with such real 
 anxiety and tenderness after their pain, and how they 
 had been bearing it? A question which not a few of 
 them shrank from answering. "Oh, I am sorry for 
 you; I wish I could bear it for you, I'm sure," was the 
  comforting speech addressed to one groaning sufferer. 
 To another she would say, "Now don't you be making 
 a fuss, you're not so very bad; tea will cure you"; while 
 the ward resounded with, "Sister, come and look at 
 my leg;" "Sister, my back do ache;" and so on, all in 
 the hope of getting attention from Sister Dora.
"Here," says the Christian Herald, in an excellent 
 outline of Miss Lonsdale's charming Biography, "she 
 evidently found the 'enlarged sphere' for which she had 
 so long pined. She used every opportunity for increasing 
 her knowledge of dressing wounds and surgery, and 
 adding to her skill in the arts of healing. She went her 
 way so noiselessly and undemonstratively that it was not 
 until she was again prostrated by illness, through neglecting 
 to change her wet clothes, that 'the real value 
 of her services was discovered.' In process of time the 
 hospital was removed to a healthier situation, and enlarged 
 in a manner corresponding to its needs. Sister 
 Dora was placed in charge of the new building, and its 
 internal organization was entrusted to her.
"A few years later, in 1874, the Good Samaritan 
 Sisterhood surrendered all official relationship with the 
 work, and Sister Dora finally severed her own connection 
 with them, remaining under the Walsall Town Committee. 
 The kind of rule she exercised could only be justified 
 by its results. Amidst admirable qualities, there was 
 sometimes a measure of self-assertion, a jealousy of 
 subordinate aid, a brusqueness of direction, unworthy of 
 her high aims. These defects in one less capable might 
  have wrought disastrously, but perhaps in some aspects 
 give even a heightened interest in her life-story. One 
 feels instinctively that she is no 'saint'; but while unquestionably 
 one of the most devoted workers the age 
 has seen, intensely human in her failures no less than 
 her triumphs—a fellow-pilgrim heavenward of like passions 
 with ourselves."
Her powers of endurance seemed wonderful. After 
 her hospital work was over she would start out to visit 
 loathsome alleys. Occasionally she sat up whole nights 
 with dying patients, for whom it was considered useless 
 to do anything, and who were therefore deserted by their 
 friends. One night she was sent for by a poor man who 
 was much attached to her and who was dying of what 
 was called "black pox," a virulent form of small-pox. 
 She went, and found him dying. Only a neighbour was 
 with him. But a small piece of candle was left, and 
 she therefore gave the woman money, and begged her 
 to hasten back with lights. She went, but never returned.
After a little while the dying man raised himself up 
 in bed with a last effort, saying, "Sister, kiss me before 
 I die!"
She took him, all covered as he was with the loathsome 
 disease, into her arms, and kissed him, the candle going 
 out almost as she did so, leaving them in total darkness. 
 He begged to be held, and she sat on thus with him in 
 her arms till he died, and then in the early dawn groped 
 her way out for assistance.
  
She was accustomed imprudently to boast that she 
 could always sit in her wet clothes without harm, and 
 she certainly did this for a long time with apparent impunity. 
 "She used to come home wet through and 
 hot with hurrying along the streets, to find a crowd of 
 out-patients awaiting her return. Her own clothes 
 were constantly forgotten and allowed to dry upon her." 
 Amidst it all she never lost her patience or cheerfulness. 
 She would invent games for the boys to play together, 
 and happy the man or boy who could catch her for a 
 game of chess or draughts. "If I could not laugh over 
 the things, I don't know what I should do," she would 
 say.
She was very tender towards little children, and had 
 great success in quieting them when fretful and soothing 
 them when in pain.
"Don't cry; sister's got you," she would say 
 to a struggling babe, carrying it safely in her right 
 arm, while going about doing needed work with her 
 other hand. And presently the little one would yield 
 to the magnetism of her gentleness, and go off into a 
 happy sleep. Once a child of nine, dreadfully burned, 
 but past the period of feeling pain, was brought to the 
 hospital. The extreme exhaustion of approaching death 
 frightened the child, and Sister Dora sat down by her, 
 and talked to her about the Saviour and the bright home 
 she was going to so soon, till the terror was exorcised, 
 and a smile of content wreathed the pallid lips. "
When 
 you come to heaven, Sister, I'll meet you at the gates with 
  a bunch of flowers
," were the little girl's last words, her 
 eyes resting, no doubt, on the flowers which Sister Dora 
 always kept within sight for the comfort and cheer of her 
 patients.
As regards those who were the objects of her solicitude, 
 she took pains to let them see that she cared for them 
 individually, telling them that 
she prayed for them one by 
 one
, and that when they went out from under her care 
 she would not forget them. After all, is not this the true 
 spirit of all really enduring Christian work? She once 
 told a friend that she often cried—she, the bright-faced 
 sister with the cheery word and the hearty laugh that 
 were so contagious in the dreary wards—yes, actually 
 cried when she went to bed at night, to think how many 
 good words she might have spoken more than she had 
 done during the ceaseless and wearing labours of the 
 day!
She tried generally to invent some queer nickname for 
 each of her patients, in order that they might (as she 
 said) the sooner forget their former lives and associations, 
 if those had been bad. Thus one man would 
 always be spoken of as "King Charles" (even having it 
 written upon his egg for breakfast), because his face suggested 
 Charles the First to Sister Dora. "Darkey," and 
 "Cockney," and "Pat," and "Stumpy," would answer 
 to no other names. Rude, rough fellows, of course, 
 constantly came in; nobody had ever seen such a 
 woman as this before; so beautiful, so good, so full of fun 
 and humour, and of sympathy for broken hearts, as well 
  as for every other kind of fracture, and the best friend 
 that many of these poor maimed men had ever known. 
 She was the personification of goodness and unselfishness 
 to them; skilful and rapid in her work,—a great 
 matter where wounds are concerned, and in a place 
 where there was much to be done and few people to 
 do it.
After the patients' supper had been served 
she read 
 prayers always
, even when, as sometimes happened, her 
 many duties and labours had so delayed her that most 
 of the patients were asleep, for she said, "
The prayers go 
 up for them all the same
." She spoke unreservedly to 
 her household upon the absolute necessity of 
constant 
 private prayer
, and thought no real blessing could attend 
 the hospital unless those who worked in it fulfilled their 
 duty in this respect. It is said of her that so unflinching 
 was her faith in the efficacy of prayer that she never 
 touched a wound without lifting up her heart to the 
 Giver of all virtue, and asking that healing might be conveyed 
 by her means; and never set a fracture without 
 a prayer that, through her instrumentality, the limb 
 might unite. As she attended upon the surgeons during 
 an operation, the most absorbing and anxious of a 
 nurse's duties, she was engaged in communion with Him 
 in whose hands are the issues of life and death.
As years passed on she became able almost to fulfil 
 the Apostle's command, "Pray without ceasing." But 
 the striking feature of her prayers was the strong faith 
 which animated them. She did not pray because it was 
  her duty, or even because she wished to fit herself to 
 hold communion with God hereafter, but because she 
 believed that everything she asked for would be granted 
 to her. She firmly held to the supernatural power put 
 into the hands of men by means of the weapon of prayer, 
 and the practical faithlessness in this respect of the world 
 at large was an ever-increasing source of surprise and 
 distress to her. The thought of the lives led by most 
 of those who were brought into the hospital weighed 
 heavily upon her mind, especially if, as was frequently 
 the case, they were insensible from an accident, and 
 never likely to recover consciousness.
"Well," she would say, "we must pray;" and at 
 night, when the ward was quiet, she might often be seen 
 kneeling by the bed of some such sufferer. "These 
 patients are my crosses," she would continue; "there 
 seems so little hope to bear one up." Her old servant 
 who slept in the next room to her mistress, used often to 
 hear her praying aloud for hours at night.
The little small-pox ambulance, in the shape of an 
 omnibus, was only too well-known at one time in the 
 streets of Walsall. During an epidemic one or more 
 patients could be placed on the floor of the carriage in 
 their beds, while by their side sat Sister Dora. When 
 people refused from prejudice to send their patients 
 to the hospital, she would go in the ambulance and 
 announce that she had "come to fetch So-and-so," and, 
 if further difficulty was made, 
she would take up the man 
 or woman in her arms
, as easily as if the burden had 
  been a baby, and lift it into her omnibus, while the 
 friends very rarely interfered to prevent her.
There is a place in Walsall well-known to the police, 
 called Marsh Lane, which is infamous on many accounts, 
 but chiefly as the scene of Irish fights. One night, 
 Sister Dora passed the entrance to this lane, and plunging 
 through the crowd, which made way for her right 
 and left, she took possession of a high door-step, where 
 her appearance gained for her the attention she desired. 
 She addressed the crowd in her usual fashion, flinging 
 well-aimed raillery at the combatants. They stood for 
 a moment or two abashed, like two furious bull-dogs, 
 and then, with the tenacity of the same creatures, again 
 rushed on each other, urged on by the cries of the crowd. 
 In one moment she had thrown herself between the wild 
 men, holding them each back with an arm which either 
 of the men could have broken as easily as he could 
 have snapped his tobacco-pipe. Her appeal was all-powerful; 
 they allowed her to win the day and the 
 fight was at an end.
It was Sister Dora's custom, during the latter months 
 of her work, to drive to Sutton, about seven miles from 
 Walsall, in a little pony carriage. She was always driven 
 on these occasions by the porter of the hospital. Twice 
 on the road she and her companion were attacked by 
 men who evidently had evil intentions. Once, just as 
 they were entering Sutton, two ruffians sprang out of a 
 hedge, but a man on horseback appearing just at the 
 moment, the men fled. Shortly after this they were 
  driving more slowly than usual one dark night, when a 
 man suddenly rushed across the road and ran after the 
 carriage. The porter whipped up the pony, and Sister 
 Dora, turning round, saw that the man had a large stick 
 in his hand. "I had only time," she said, "for a short 
 prayer, when the stick was brought down heavily on the 
 back of the carriage. I had leant instinctively to one 
 side as I said my prayer, and thus my head escaped the 
 blow which was intended for it." The man who made 
 the attack did not know that it was Sister Dora who was 
 in the carriage.
For fifteen years Sister Dora continued her labours 
 with strong will and unflagging energy, the constraining 
 power through all being love to Christ and a tender 
 yearning for the erring and the suffering, but at last 
 her own strength began to fail. This was in 1877. 
 She consulted a confidential surgeon, and found that 
 a complaint had set in which must ultimately end 
 her life, involving great pain and admitting of no cure. 
 She was determined to keep this a profound secret 
 from all but herself and her doctor. For nearly 
 twenty months she continued to go about her duties 
 as usual, spending the night by the bedside of wretched 
 dying patients, soothing, exhorting, encouraging, going 
 almost down with them into the dark valley of the 
 shadow of death. She was sometimes fearful, perhaps 
 not without reason, lest they should cling too exclusively 
 to her and to the human support which she afforded 
 them. Yet her religion was eminently spiritual. To 
  one who tried to follow her she gave the wholesome 
 advice: "When you want to lead any one to Jesus, 
 remember, you must point, and take care not to stand 
 in the way yourself."
"Sister Dora was once travelling as usual third 
 class, when a number of half-drunken navvies got in 
 after her, and before she could change her carriage 
 the train was in motion. She recollected that her dress, 
 a black gown and cloak, with a quiet black bonnet 
 and veil, would probably, as on former encounters 
 with half-intoxicated men, protect her from insult. 
 Her fellow-travellers began to talk, and at last one of 
 them swore several blasphemous oaths. Sister Dora's 
 whole soul burnt within her, and she thought, 'Shall 
 I sit and hear this?' but then came the reflection, 
 'What will they do to me if I interfere?' and this 
 dread kept her quiet a moment or two longer. But 
 the language became more and more violent, and it 
 passed through her mind, 'What must these men think 
 of any woman who can sit by and hear such words 
 unmoved; but, above all, what will they think of a 
 woman in my dress who is afraid to speak to them?'
"At once she stood up her full height in the carriage, 
 and called out loudly, 'I will not hear the Master 
 whom I serve spoken of in this way.' Immediately 
 they dragged her down into her seat, with a torrent 
 of oaths, and one of the most violent roared, 'Hold 
 your jaw, you fool; do you want your face smashed 
 in?' They held her down on the seat between them; 
  nor did she attempt to struggle, satisfied with having 
 made her open protest. At the next station they let 
 her go, and she quickly got out of the carriage. A 
 minute after, while she was standing on the platform, 
 she heard a rough voice behind her, 'Shake hands, 
 mum! you're a good-plucked one, you are! You were 
 right and we were wrong.' She gave her hand to the 
 man, who hurried away, for fear, no doubt, that his 
 comrades should jeer at him."
All that's bright must fade. "All flesh is grass, and 
 all the beauty thereof as but the flower of the field." 
 And so with Sister Dora, from whom we take sorrowful 
 leave by relating her last illness and death.
When the hospital was closed for a time, while a 
 new building was erected, Dora went first to stay with 
 her relations, and then to London and to Paris to 
 see some new surgical appliances. But at last, in 
 October, 1878, she broke down entirely. She went 
 to Birmingham to see her doctor, and was taken so 
 ill there that she was supposed to be dying; but she 
 insisted on being removed to Walsall to die among 
 her people. "The committee of the hospital engaged 
 a small house for her, the new building being not 
 quite ready, but from the time she went she never 
 left her bed. The hospital was opened in her name, but 
 alas! she never saw it. Her old servant came to nurse 
 her, and to her she was obliged to reveal the hopeless 
 state she was in; but she kept it from others as long 
 as she could, and would not allow even her loving sisters 
  to come and tend her, in spite of their grief and 
 entreaties.
She bore her intense sufferings heroically and resignedly. 
 They were days of mental darkness and depression, 
 as well as bodily pain. "I cannot pray; I 
 cannot think. I sadly fear I shall be lost; I can only 
 trust." But she triumphed at last by faith in a personal 
 Saviour. During the paroxysms of pain she feared her 
 faith might give way, and so had set up before her a 
 crucifix, that she might constantly be reminded of her 
 Saviour's greater sufferings. This fact shows more 
 than anything else the nature of the semi-darkness 
 through which she had passed in spiritual matters: 
 but if her whole life's labour and dying hours mean 
 anything they surely mean that she simply trusted in 
 Christ without the intervention of either priest or 
 crucifix.
In one of her letters she says: "I have not had two 
 hours' sleep for four days and nights, but in the midst 
 of the fiery furnace there was a form like unto the 
 Son of Man." "If I went back to teach patients 
 again," she said, when nearing her end, "I should 
 dwell more than ever on the necessity of building our 
 hopes on Jesus only." The cabmen of the town had 
 assembled in a mission-room at her request, and the 
 clergyman who was going to address them was with 
 her. "Oh, speak to them," she said, "on this text, 
 —'What think ye of Christ?' Make it ring in their 
 ears."
  
On Saturday, December 21st, 1878, it became evident 
 that the end was really drawing near. Sister Dora's 
 depression now seemed greater than before, and a 
 dread, amounting to horror, of the last pangs of death 
 came upon her. Her coughing was incessant. At 
 times all was loneliness and darkness; but still the 
 faith in which her life had been passed stood her in 
 such good stead that one of her nurses, who had 
 watched many death-beds, testified, "I never saw such 
 faith and patience." She anticipated a welcome from 
 those souls whom she had herself led to God, and the 
 idea comforted her. Repeatedly she exclaimed "Oh, 
 I hope I shall sing my Christmas carol in heaven!"
On the morning of the 24th, she said, cheerfully, 
 "I am dying; run for Sister Ellen!" Meanwhile, an 
 old companion tried to soothe her, saying, "Our blessed 
 Lord is standing at the gates of Heaven to open them 
 for you." But she no longer needed such consolation, 
 for all her darkness was dissipated by the gathering 
 glory-cloud, and she answered, "I see Him there, the 
 gates are opened wide." At two o'clock in the afternoon 
 she was at rest.
Almost the whole population of Walsall came to her 
 funeral, many rough workmen weeping like children at 
 the grave. She has left a memory which will not soon 
 fade, of being a true and noble worker for God and 
 man.
