dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Foster_Heroines of Modern Religion  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
CHAPTER VI
SISTER DORA
BY GERTRUDE LESLIE MUMFORD
Occasionally in searching for the development 
 of great natures one finds that 
 from their very faults, from the very temperamental 
 obstacles against which they struggle, 
 spring the sources of their greatness. So it 
 was with Dorothy Wyndlow Pattison, with a 
 will so strong that, although it often brought 
 her into difficulties, it enabled her successfully 
 to struggle through difficulties that would have 
 overwhelmed a woman less determined. The 
 very characteristic that sometimes became a 
 stumbling block to her feet more often proved 
 to be the means of the fulfillment of her aspirations.
Dorothy Pattison, born January 16, 1832, in 
 the little village of Hauxwell, near Richmond, 
 in the North Riding of Yorkshire, was the 
 eleventh child of a family of twelve. Her 
 father was Reverend Mark James Pattison, a 
 man who "walked with God." From him she 
 inherited her shapely figure, while from her 
 mother, the daughter of a Richmond banker, 
 came her beauty of feature and coloring so 
 much admired. As a child Dorothy was very 
  
SISTER DORA
   delicate—a fact that kept her from regular 
 lessons.
Her knowledge she picked up in scraps which 
 she eagerly stored away in her retentive mind. 
 In her childhood, as in her later life, she was 
 quick to grasp a situation; her powers of observation 
 later stood her in good stead in the 
 hospital ward. Among the country people she 
 had the reputation of being a quiet child but 
 it was due to the fact that she was not sufficiently 
 robust to throw herself into active 
 sports. Delicate or not, she was by nature 
 both mischievous and strong-willed, the leader 
 in many escapades.
Upon one occasion she and one of her sisters 
 had new Sunday bonnets which they did not 
 like. In vain they pleaded not to wear them; 
 the decree had gone forth that the bonnets 
 must be worn out. At last Dorothy's 
 chance appeared in a pouring rainstorm which 
 came up one day when Mr. and Mrs. Pattison 
 were out. "Quick!" cried Dorothy to her sister, 
 "here is our chance for getting rid of the 
 bonnets." On went the bonnets, and the children's 
 heads were thrust out of the window 
 until the distasteful headgear was completely 
 ruined. When Sunday came, the two children 
 appeared with no bonnets. Upon being sent 
 for them they returned, confident and cheerful, 
 with the wrecks upon their heads. "Why, 
 mamma, we can't wear those," said Dorothy. 
 But they did, not only for that day but for 
 many a day afterwards!
  
In the parish, she was a general favorite. 
 The Pattisons, as a family, were both charitable 
 and hospitable towards their poor neighbors, 
 and Dorothy shared with her sisters the 
 work of carrying aid to the cottagers. The 
 girls saved their pocket money and turned and 
 remade their old dresses so that by spending 
 less for clothes they might have more money 
 to give. Sometimes when they were seated at 
 the dinner table with the keen appetities of normal 
 children after a morning in the open air, a 
 remark of the rector that poor So-and-So must 
 be faring badly as Bill was out of work again 
 would cause them to pack their own hearty dinner 
 in a basket and take it to the suffering 
 family, while they themselves dined on bread 
 and cheese. They delighted to give, not only 
 material things, but their time and practical 
 sympathy. Once, when Dorothy was abroad, 
 a schoolboy in the village became very sick 
 with rheumatic fever. His one longing was to 
 live to see "Miss Dora" again. On the day on 
 which she returned he listened intently and long 
 before anyone else could hear the carriage 
 wheels he cried, "There she is," and waited 
 with what patience he could command. He 
 was not disappointed; at once she became his 
 nurse and remained with him until he died.
As she grew older she outgrew the delicacy 
 that had characterized her as a child, and with 
 her newly-acquired strength she felt the need 
 of action. Outdoor games and driving but most 
 of all vigorous cross-country riding, she made 
  an outlet for her overflowing energy. She became 
 a daring rider, followed the hounds with 
 keen enjoyment, and cantered alone across the 
 solitary moors.
At twenty, she was a picture of health, with 
 a personal beauty that was obvious to the dullest 
 eye. As she came back from a cross-country 
 gallop, with brown curls loosened, and the 
 delicate color of her cheeks heightened by the 
 sharp country wind, she was a picture at which 
 all turned to look. To physical strength and 
 beauty were united high animal spirits and a 
 sense of humor, which, always sparkling out 
 through her merry brown eyes, were to keep 
 her sweet and strong through the trials of the 
 years before her.
But the energy that caused her, when physically 
 able, as a child to tear vigorously 
 through the house in strenuous games with her 
 brothers and sisters, and, later, to enjoy so 
 much a wild gallop upon a horse's back, now 
 demanded some definite work upon which to 
 spend its powers. A passive acceptance of life 
 was foreign to her nature. She longed to be 
 out and doing. Florence Nightingale's* 
* 
See Chapter V, page 120, Heroines of Modern Progress.
 work 
 in the Crimean war roused all her enthusiasm. 
 She begged her father to let her go out to 
 Scutari as a nurse, but upon his refusal she 
 acquiesced with outward quietness. She 
 slighted none of her duties, in the home or in 
 the village, and spent much of her time in nursing 
 her invalid mother. Sometimes she visited 
  her oldest brother, Mark, at Redcar. When 
 she was twenty-nine, her mother died, and thus 
 Dorothy's chief work in the home was taken 
 away from her.
At Choatham, near Redcar where she visited 
 her brother, was an order of nursing sisters— 
 the Sisterhood of the Good Samaritans. There 
 they had established a convalescent hospital, 
 and they devoted themselves to relieving the 
 sickness of the poor of that neighborhood. In 
 their example, Dorothy thought she had found 
 the solution for her unsatisfied craving for a 
 life of worth-while activity. Her father, however, 
 was opposed to the idea of her entering 
 the sisterhood; so for the time she gave it up. 
 But she could not longer remain idle in comfort. 
 Just at this time she saw an advertisement 
 for a lady to take charge of the village 
 school at Little Woolston, on the borders of 
 Buckinghamshire, and in October, 1861, much 
 against the wishes of her father, she left home 
 to become a teacher.
Here she threw herself into the labors of a 
 parish schoolmistress, but far in excess of her 
 duties. She not only taught the children, but 
 she visited them in their homes, nursed them 
 when they were sick, played with them when 
 they were well, told them wonderful stories, 
 and in return was fervently loved by them. 
 Nor did she stop there; her work extended to 
 the poor and sick of the whole parish. If she 
 was lonely, living by herself in a tiny cottage 
 with no servant except an old woman who came 
  in occasionally to scrub, she only threw herself 
 harder into the work. Indeed, she probably 
 overworked, and a neglected cold soon brought 
 on an attack of pleurisy. When she grew a 
 little better she was sent to Redcar to convalesce; 
 the associations there roused in her 
 all the longings for a definite and settled life 
 work—longings that had been steadily growing 
 within her. This time her willfulness would 
 brook no opposition; against the combined 
 wishes of the members of her family, in the 
 autumn of 1864, she became a sister of the order 
 of the Good Samaritans.
The Sisterhood of the Good Samaritans is 
 what is termed a "secular" order affiliated with 
 the Church of England. That is, it is a working 
 order whose members are bound by no 
 vows except one of a definite term of obedience 
 to their pastor and to the "mother superior" 
 appointed by him. To this order, then, 
 Dorothy Pattison, henceforth Sister Dora, 
 brought her burning ardor for work. Here she 
 was put through a severe training, which, while 
 distasteful to her at the time, undoubtedly not 
 only made her proficient in the mechanical part 
 of her profession but gave her lessons in self-control. 
 She learned to make beds and to 
 cook; at first, when those in charge pulled to 
 pieces the beds she had just made, she would 
 sit down and cry for discouragement, but in the 
 end her good sense conquered and she quickly 
 learned to adopt the approved methods. A 
 large part of her time was spent in a small 
  cottage hospital in North Ormesbury, where 
 she worked sometimes with another sister but 
 often alone. On January 5, 1865, she writes 
 from Ormesbury to a friend in Little Woolston: 
 "I have been ordered off to the hospital 
 to-day, and am sitting up to-night with a poor 
 man who is suffering from concussion of the 
 brain; and he alarms me by getting up and 
 trying to get away, and he is insensible [i. e. not 
 himself], so that it is useless speaking to him. 
 It is so cold that, though sitting over the fire, 
 I am shivering. I have put a blister on my 
 patient. I hope, when it takes effect, there will 
 be an improvement. I hope he won't die, for 
 I am the only Sister here; the others have gone 
 for their holiday."
She stayed at North Ormesbury until the 
 early part of 1865, when she was sent to Walsall, 
 in South Staffordshire, to assist in the 
 work of a small cottage hospital there.
Walsall is an industrial town in the coal and 
 iron district near Birmingham, on the outskirts 
 of the "Black Country." By day it is sordid 
 and dingy, but at night it glows with an 
 awful splendor. The same smelting furnaces 
 whose smoke daily blackens the landscape, at 
 night glare through the darkness with a malignant 
 flaming red positively infernal. The 
 smelting furnaces and the coalpits furnished 
 work for most of the men in town. Accidents 
 were numerous and medical aid was scarce; a 
 hospital of some sort where the wounded 
 could be taken for immediate treatment became 
  a necessity. Accordingly, in 1863, a cottage 
 hospital of four beds was established under 
 the charge of Sister Mary of the Good Samaritans. 
 By the time it was a year old the number 
 of beds had increased to fourteen. Hither, 
 in 1865, Sister Mary having fallen ill, came 
 Sister Dora, as head of the hospital. Immediately 
 after her arrival she caught smallpox 
 from some of the outpatients and for a 
 time was very ill. She was put in a small room 
 whose window faced the street. At that time 
 the little hospital was the victim of much 
 opposition and even petty persecution from the 
 very people it was there to help. Stones and 
 mud were thrown at the window of the room 
 where Sister Dora lay sick. Soon after her recovery, 
 as she passed a crowd of roughs, 
 one exclaimed: "There goes one of those 
 Sisters of Misery!" At the same time he 
 threw a stone which cut her forehead. A 
 short time later, the very fellow was badly 
 hurt in a coalpit accident and was brought to 
 the hospital, where Sister Dora nursed him 
 with particular care. One day, when he had 
 nearly recovered, she discovered him silently 
 crying, and presently he penitently blurted out 
 the whole story. To his surprise, he learned 
 that Sister Dora had recognized him when he 
 was brought in. This was his first experience 
 with the Christian ideal of returning good for 
 evil.
In April 1865, she was recalled to Choatham 
 for a short time. Here the restraint and decorum 
  imposed by the Sisterhood sometimes 
 proved too much for her lively spirits. One 
 day a donkey with the reputation of upsetting 
 everybody was brought to the door of the 
 home. "Oh, let me ride him," cried Sister 
 Dora. "He won't kick me off." Tying her 
 bonnet strings a little more tightly than usual, 
 with her black skirts tucked up carefully around 
 her, she mounted the beast and managed to 
 stick for a while despite his most frantic 
 efforts to throw her. It was a clash of two 
 stubborn wills, but the brute strength of the 
 donkey finally won and Sister Dora in spite of 
 her proud boast was ignominiously thrown. 
 She did penance for this prank, however, because 
 for some days her knees were so bruised 
 and swollen that they were very painful to kneel 
 on. She had had her fun, however, and bore 
 the pain in silence rather than confess her undignified 
 behavior to the mother superior.
It must not be supposed that her irrepressible 
 spirits were always thus in evidence. 
 Just before coming to Walsall she had passed 
 through the crisis of her religious life. She 
 had never lost her sense of the nearness of God 
 and a firm belief in the efficacy of prayer, but 
 her intellectual judgment had become distorted. 
 For a time her intelligence balked at believing 
 the authenticity of the Scriptures and her attitude 
 might well have been summed up "Lord, 
 I believe; help Thou my unbelief." During 
 this time she was aided and strengthened by 
 Reverend Richard Twigg, rector of St. John's, 
  Wednesbury, to whose church for early communion 
 she walked almost every Sunday morning. 
 Large-hearted, large-minded, his life 
 a living example of his faith, he steadied 
 and held Sister Dora as no one else could. 
 Among all the people she met during her stay 
 in Walsall, Mr. Twigg was the one who, more 
 than anyone else, was destined to help her most 
 when she needed help. She emerged from this 
 inner trial, however, with her whole being centered 
 around a deep personal love of her 
 Saviour, Jesus Christ. Later she was to be 
 tested and it was this sincere devotion to her 
 Lord that brought her out triumphant.
Her always strong desire to help others was 
 reënforced by the inward peace and sense of 
 love she now felt. She had inherited a comparatively 
 large income but she spent it chiefly 
 on others; her own wants were very simple. 
 Work and prayer seemed to be the two rules 
 of her life and it would be hard to say which 
 predominated.
It was this spirit that she carried with her 
 back to Walsall after her second brief stay at 
 Choatham. There she took up her work again 
 quietly and unobtrusively. For a long time 
 the prosperous and healthy hardly knew of 
 her. Only in the slums, in the back allies where 
 ignorance and dirt fought a winning fight 
 against health, she was known by those whom 
 she sought out—those so miserable that they 
 would not, even for relief, obtrude themselves 
 at the hospital. It is no wonder that they 
  learned to love her who healed their bodies 
 even as she prayed for their souls. So she 
 moved in and out among them, in all kinds of 
 weather, at all hours, never considering herself—indeed 
 throwing herself into her work 
 with such impetuous eagerness that in 1866 she 
 had a serious illness; for three weeks her life 
 was in danger. Then the people of Walsall 
 found out what Sister Dora meant to the 
 town. The hospital was besieged with inquiries, 
 and she herself always felt that her 
 recovery was due to the prayers of the congregation 
 of St. John's, Wednesbury, where 
 she attended church.
The usefulness of the hospital increased 
 steadily, and under her adequate care, gave 
 great relief to the community. The small, 
 fourteen-bed building soon proved to be insufficient. 
 Always poorly ventilated, it became so 
 impregnated with infection that wounds refused 
 to heal, and case after case was sent away uncured. 
 The committee in charge resolved to 
 build one larger and better. In this undertaking 
 they not only had Sister Dora's approval 
 but, to a great extent, her financial aid, and 
 thanks to her assistance the new hospital was 
 ready for occupancy in 1868. It was situated 
 on a hill, with good ventilation, and had twenty-eight 
 beds with room for more if needed. Just 
 as patients and nurses were well settled in their 
 new quarters, a smallpox epidemic broke out. 
 Sister Dora's efforts were now redoubled. 
 Every minute that she could spare from her 
  hospital duties she spent nursing the victims 
 in their homes. Often she would be the only 
 one in the house besides the sick person. One 
 night she found a man dying with "blackpox" 
 —smallpox in its most virulent form. There 
 was no light in the house but a small candle-end; 
 so giving a neighbor some money she 
 asked her to get a light of some sort. The 
 woman did not come back; as the miserable bit 
 of candle flickered down, the dying man raised 
 himself, saying: "Sister, do not leave me before 
 I die." She took him in her arms, and in 
 total darkness she sat on through the long night 
 even after he had died, until the dawn came.
In course of time the epidemic was over, and 
 work settled down to its accustomed routine. 
 From the beginning of her hospital career Sister 
 Dora had determined to become an efficient 
 surgical nurse. The old surgeon of the hospital, 
 seeing her cool and sensible courage, had 
 taught her as much as he could. She undertook 
 more and more of the minor cases and 
 gradually came to set all the fractures. She 
 was an advocate of conservative surgery and 
 invariably voted against amputation if there 
 seemed even a chance of saving the limb. One 
 night a young man was brought in whose arm 
 had been caught in his machine and so badly 
 torn and twisted that the physician declared it 
 must be amputated immediately. Sister Dora's 
 sympathy was aroused by the young fellow's 
 groan of despair. He turned from the doctor 
 to her kindly face and implored her to save 
  him. She examined the wound attentively; 
 the young workman's face showed that he had 
 led a clean and wholesome life. She told the 
 doctor she thought she could save the arm. 
 He replied flatly that amputation was necessary, 
 and refused to have another thing to do 
 with the case. On her own responsibility, Sister 
 Dora undertook to save the arm. After 
 three weeks of tense anxiety on her part, she 
 called the physician and showed him the arm 
 progressing rapidly towards its old time usefulness. 
 With pride the surgeon who had 
 taught her brought the hospital staff to show 
 them what might be done. The patient thereafter 
 went by the name of "Sister's Arm."
Sister Dora had been doing all the nursing, 
 the wardwork, and sometimes even the cooking, 
 but the work had increased so much that 
 she was now obliged to have help. Accordingly, 
 with the consent of the committee, she 
 took a small number of "lady-pupils" to teach 
 the rudiments of nursing. As a teacher she 
 was not wholly successful; she was rather impatient, 
 preferring to do the task herself than 
 to go through the tedious process of showing 
 others how to do it. The difficulty was that 
 she did not have the power of organizing the 
 efforts of others, and her own personality was 
 so great that it had overshadowed all lesser 
 endeavors. "The main lesson which her ladypupils 
 carried away from Walsall, was not how 
 to dress wounds or how to bandage, or even 
 how to manage a hospital on the most popular 
  as well as on the most economical method, but 
 rather the mighty results which the motive 
 power of love towards God, and for His sake, 
 towards mankind, might enable one single 
 woman to effect."
A great deal of her work was done for children, 
 with whom she was an especial favorite. 
 Often she would carry the littlest one around 
 on one arm, while she made beds, prepared 
 medicine, or did other hospital work. To the 
 fretful she would say, "Don't you cry; Sister's 
 got you!" Burns were perhaps the commonest 
 cases which the hospital had to treat. Children 
 were brought almost frantic with terror 
 and pain. When such a case came in, she would 
 drop whatever work was in hand and bend all 
 her energies to soothing the frightened child. 
 After she had calmed the small sufferer she 
 would dress the wounds. If the child was 
 plainly dying she would tell it in a simple way 
 about Jesus, the children's friend, until the 
 child died peacefully and happily, as did one 
 nine year old girl whose last words were: 
 "When you come to heaven, Sister, I'll meet 
 you at the gates with a bunch of flowers."
Thus, simply, she talked to the children of 
 Christ. Unless for some definite purpose, 
 however, she never talked about her religion 
 to strangers, but when occasion arose she was 
 not afraid to bear witness to her faith. Once, 
 when she was riding in the third class carriage 
 of a train, four or five drunken men got on at 
 one of the way stations. At last Sister Dora 
  could bear their foul language no longer; rising 
 to her full height—a commanding figure in her 
 plain black dress and little white bonnet—she 
 said: "I will not hear the Master whom I 
 serve spoken of in this way." One of them 
 dragged her to her seat and bade her keep still. 
 Having made her protest she wisely saw the 
 folly of any further action. When she got out 
 at her station, however, one of the men came 
 up to her and bade her shake hands for she was 
 "a rare plucky one!"
In this and in many other instances she was 
 "plucky" with the courage that comes from 
 faith. Her creed was that of the Church of 
 England, but she had a broad tolerance for all 
 sects; indeed she often confessed a liking for 
 slightly "sensational" religion. She attended 
 with keen interest a Moody and Sankey revival 
 and afterwards used their hymn book in her 
 hospital. The Oxford Movement, which had 
 stirred all England during her childhood, left 
 her undisturbed. She felt no need of ritual in 
 her worship, and, on the whole, was perhaps a 
 little scornful of it. The Bible was her constant 
 companion, a marked copy being always 
 with her; a "lady-pupil" who came upon her 
 while she was quietly reading it describes her 
 expression as "unearthly."
And now came the test of Sister Dora's faith. 
 A gentleman connected with the hospital wished 
 to marry her. He was a man of great intellectual 
 power, but lacked one vital possession— 
 the Christian faith. Although Sister Dora was 
  attracted to him personally, she felt that it 
 would be wrong for her to marry a professed 
 unbeliever. Mr. Twigg of St. John's, who had 
 helped her before, came to her aid again. 
 There could be but one decision: she put away 
 this earthly love that she might better attain 
 to the heavenly. The strain, however, combined 
 with her continuous hard work proved 
 almost too much for her. One day she fainted 
 while making up a bed in the ward and for a 
 month was dangerously ill. During this illness 
 perhaps no inquiry was more typical than that 
 of the man nicknamed "Sister's Arm." Each 
 Sunday morning he walked eleven miles to the 
 hospital, pulled the bell with a hard jerk and 
 said to the maid, "How's Sister?" Then he 
 would say, "Tell her that's her arm that rang 
 the bell," and walk the eleven miles back.
One day, after she had been ill a month, she 
 heard there was to be a serious operation performed 
 that morning. When the doctors were 
 ready to operate Sister Dora appeared in her 
 old place, and from that time resumed her work 
 with increased vigor. A picture given by one 
 of the "lady-pupils" of the daily hospital 
 routine shows Sister Dora down in the wards 
 at half-past eight in the morning, making beds, 
 giving the patients their breakfast, reading 
 prayers, doing the regular routine of the wards 
 —"the bright sunshiny way she always worked, 
 with a smile and a pleasant word for everyone, 
 was in itself a medicine of the best kind"— 
 dressing wounds, caring for the out-patients, 
  serving the patients' dinner—which she herself 
 always carved—prayers again, for the 
 nurses and servants this time, and seeing outpatients 
 until it was time for the afternoon 
 tea.
As the hospital was small, there was necessarily 
 a large number of out-patients, for only 
 those who could not be treated otherwise were 
 admitted to the wards. One day a woman came 
 in with a gash in her head caused by a drunken 
 husband. As Sister Dora was bandaging it 
 the woman broke out fiercely against her husband. 
 She would not stand his abuse any 
 longer, she declared. She was going to have 
 him arrested that very day. "Do you really 
 mean it?" asked Sister Dora. "Indeed I do," 
 said her patient. Whereupon Sister Dora took 
 off the bandage she had just put on and bound 
 the broken head up again much more elaborately 
 than before. "Why did you do that?" 
 asked a curious "lady-pupil" later. "Oh," 
 said Sister Dora, her eyes twinkling, "I thought 
 if she did have him arrested the judge would 
 give him another month on account of that second 
 bandage." Such incidents as this enlivened 
 somewhat the rather dreary work of 
 the day.
After the nurses' tea, about half-past five or 
 six was the pleasantest part of the day, for 
 then she talked cheerily to each patient or else 
 someone would play the harmonium and they 
 would all sing hymns. To quote one of the 
 pupils: "Nobody had ever seen such a woman 
  as this before, so beautiful, so good, so tenderhearted, 
 so strong and so gentle, so full of fun 
 and humor, and of sympathy for broken hearts 
 as well as for every other kind of fracture, and 
 the best friend that many of these poor maimed 
 men had ever known." Then wounds would 
 be dressed for the night, the patients given 
 their supper; after she finished her round of 
 duties she would always read evening prayers 
 for the patients. It did not matter to her that 
 many of them were asleep. In her own words: 
 "The prayers go up for them all the same." 
 This was the record of a day's routine in her 
 hospital—now truly hers, for in 1874 relations 
 were finally and completely severed between 
 Sister Dora and the Sisterhood of the Good 
 Samaritans. What she said to a friend who 
 was engaging for her a servant for the hospital 
 best expresses her ideal for it: "Tell her this 
 is not an ordinary house, or even hospital; I 
 want her to understand that all who serve here, 
 in whatever capacity, ought to have one rule, 
 love for God, and then I need not say love for 
 their work. I wish we could use and really 
 mean the word Maison-Dieu."
She was a great believer in prayer and many 
 a man has awakened at night to find her kneeling 
 by his bed quietly praying for him. It has 
 been said of a certain great surgeon who has 
 recently died that before he performed any 
 operation he paused for a moment's prayer. 
 Of Sister Dora it is true that before attending 
 to any wound she first prayed that, through her 
  as the instrument, God in his loving kindness 
 would effect a cure. She had a great respect 
 for the presence of death, and the doctor's assistants 
 no longer smoked and jested at postmortem 
 examinations when she was present. 
 On all practical subjects connected with the 
 hospital she brought to bear her great intellect, 
 and to the committees she was the final authority, 
 and in all contentions, it was Sister Dora, 
 who, calm and clear-sighted, settled the difficulties.
A word must be said of the two missions that 
 were held while she was at Walsall. The first 
 was in 1873. These "missions" of the Church 
 of England are a form of evangelistic "revival 
 meetings." It is a special effort, concentrated 
 through a week or two of powerful appeal, to 
 quicken spiritually those within the church and 
 to bring those outside to a knowledge of the 
 love of God and of his power to save sinners. 
 On the second night of this first mission, Sister 
 Dora went out into the streets to bring in those 
 who would not come by themselves, and entered 
 the church with thirty or forty in her train. 
 The second mission was held in 1876, and she 
 prepared to work for it more earnestly than 
 for the first.
With her as guide, two of the clergy went into 
 the worst parts of Walsall. One night the 
 whole company in a saloon, including fifteen or 
 twenty hardened women, went down on their 
 knees while she prayed aloud for these "brothers 
 and sisters." While the mission lasted,
  Sister Dora and one clergyman held midnight 
 services in a little hall in the heart of the slums, 
 and even after the mission ended Sister Dora 
 continued its work under her own direction. 
 A short service was held late every Sunday 
 night and she would go out personally into the 
 homes of these dissolute men and women and 
 bring them to the service. In all this there was 
 an element of risk, of positive danger, but a 
 rough, "Shut up, you fool—it's Sister Dora," 
 was enough to forestall any violence.
The year preceding this last mission had been 
 marked by a second outbreak of smallpox in 
 Walsall. After the last epidemic the city authorities 
 built an epidemic hospital on the outskirts 
 of the town. The difficulty now was to 
 get the people to go to it. They would rather 
 die at home, they said, and those whose relatives 
 were stricken concealed them. Sister Dora, 
 seeing that the spread of the disease was unavoidable 
 under the circumstances, wrote to the 
 authorities that she would nurse the smallpox 
 patients. Thus the difficulty was overcome, for 
 people knew that where Sister Dora was they 
 could trust their relatives. So she dropped 
 her own work and went to take up that of the 
 epidemic hospital, knowing that she herself 
 might take the disease, and with a firmly-fixed 
 presentiment that she might not return alive.
The only help she could get at this hospital 
 was from an old porter—who would often get 
 drunk and go off for the night—and two old 
 women from the workhouse. In a letter she 
  says: "I came and opened the smallpox hospital 
 on Saturday. It was spreading in the 
 town, and no one could be found to come; also 
 the people could not be persuaded to come until 
 they heard I was here. … [For help], I have 
 got two 'critters' from the workhouse; one is 
 so helpless, I have to do work for her, and the 
 other sits up at nights so can do no more. … 
 They [the patients] are all so pleased to have 
 me here. I had such a nice Sunday. God's 
 blessing seems very much on the place. I spoke 
 to them. … Oh, that I had Mr. Twigg's power 
 to help souls! I know you will all pray for 
 me that, living or dying, I may glorify Him. 
 You must not fret for me." Later she writes: 
 "I rejoice that He has permitted one so unworthy 
 to work for Him; and oh, if He should 
 think me fit to lay down my life for Him, rejoice, 
 rejoice at so great a privilege. My heart is 
 running over with thankfulness, and as I toil 
 on I seem to hear the still small voice, 'Ye did 
 it unto Me.' … Oh, don't talk about my life. 
 If you knew it you would be down on your knees 
 crying for mercy for me, a sinner." "I do 
 miss my Sundays. … If it were not for the 
 thought 'where two or three are gathered together, 
 there am I in the midst,' I do not know 
 what I should do. … I think I may almost say 
 it is a closer walk with God. With the pestilence 
 all around you cannot help living each day as if 
 it were your last. There has come that peace 
 which the world cannot give. If I had a wish, 
 it would be that He would count me worthy to 
  lay down my life for Him." To her patients at 
 her own hospital she writes, after having remembered 
 each one personally: "Have you 
 been singing to-day? You must sing particularly 
 'Safe in the arms of Jesus,'* 
* 
For the account of the origin of this bymn, see Chapter V, page 127.
 and think of 
 me. Living or dying, I am His. Oh, my children, 
 you all love me for the very little I do 
 for you; but, oh, if you would only think what 
 Jesus has done, and is doing for you, your 
 hearts would soon be full of love for Him, and 
 you would all choose Him for your Master. 
 Now, whilst you are on your beds, read and 
 study His life; see the road He went, and follow 
 Him. I know you all want to go to heaven, 
 but wishing will not get you there. You must 
 choose now in this life; you cannot choose hereafter 
 when you die. That great multitude St. 
 John saw round the throne had washed their 
 robes and made them white in the blood of the 
 Lamb, which was shed for each one of you. 
 God loves you; I know it, by His letting you get 
 hurt and bringing you to the hospital. 'As 
 many as I love, I rebuke and chasten.' Think 
 over these things my dear children. Your 
 mother is thinking of you and praying for you. 
 And if it please God you should never see her 
 again, will you make up your minds to walk in 
 the narrow way, so that we may all meet in the 
 green fields above? May God bring you all 
 safe there is the earnest prayer of your faithful 
 friend, Sister Dora."
  
After six months of this steady and confining 
 service, in spite of her presentiment, she returned 
 to them and resumed her work quietly. 
 Just two months after her return in October, 
 1875, there was an explosion of one of the smelting 
 furnaces. Eleven men fearfully burned by 
 molten metal, were carried to the hospital, which 
 turned out all but its worst cases to make room 
 for them. Night and day, for ten days Sister 
 Dora worked, cutting away the clothing that 
 would adhere to the burnt flesh, bandaging 
 wounds, and giving what little relief was possible. 
 Many people came to offer their help 
 but could not endure the terrible sights and 
 odor. This accident gave the hospital its deathblow—it 
 had become fatally infected, and the 
 committee finally determined to pull it down 
 and build a larger new one. In the meantime 
 they fitted up a small house in Bridgeman Street 
 as a temporary hospital.
In this temporary hospital during the winter 
 of 1876-7, Sister Dora began to notice in herself 
 a weakness foreign to her perfect health. 
 Always strong, she had been in the habit of 
 picking up her patients or carrying a dead body 
 without particular effort. Although now only 
 with increased effort, she continued her heavy 
 work until the trouble grew so that she was 
 forced to consult a doctor. There, in the doctor's 
 office, she entered the outskirts of the valley 
 of the shadow. Although she had concealed 
 her illness up to the last possible moment, she 
  had begun then to feel the inroads of a malignant 
 cancer.
All through that winter she worked with a 
 frenzy that brought remonstrances from her 
 friends. In addition to her work in the hospital, 
 at night she carried on the evangelism in 
 the slums which she had begun at the time of 
 the second mission. She was enabled "to see 
 the image of God, defiled and darkened though 
 it might be, impressed upon every living soul, to 
 feel her kinship with it, to lay her hand, not 
 upon the defilements and impurity, but through 
 the means of her infinite love and tenderness, 
 upon the one spot yet capable of being healed, 
 thus kindling the faintest spark into a living 
 flame." On Christmas 1877 (her last) she invited 
 all her old patients to a dinner which she 
 provided. She worked steadily until June when 
 an outbreak of typhoid in the temporary hospital 
 caused its closing, and Sister Dora had an 
 unexpected holiday.
As soon as she was able to leave she visited 
 her nieces in the Isle of Man. From there she 
 went to Paris, and in September was in London 
 studying the treatment of wounds under Professor 
 Lister. All this time she was bearing 
 alone her own rapidly increasing burden. On 
 October 8 she returned to Walsall where the 
 hospital committee, hearing of her serious illness, 
 hired a small house for her. Her condition 
 was such that her doctor gave her about a 
 fortnight to live, and on October 10 she wrote 
 to a friend: "It is hopeless (I use that word 
  merely technically) so they don't tease me with 
 medicines and remedies, and there is no fluctuation 
 of hopes and fears. I have not a care; it 
 is all sunshine. God has taken away the fear of 
 death, and all sorrow at parting with life."
On November 4, the new hospital was opened 
 "in the name of Sister Dora," a silver key having 
 been sent to her by the committee with the 
 request that she give it to the Mayor and "thus 
 empower him to open the new building 
in her 
 name."
 Where to find her successor had been 
 one of her greatest anxieties, and on December 
 6 it was happily removed. Sister Ellen, a complete 
 stranger to Sister Dora and to Walsall, 
 offered her services for the hospital. Sister 
 Dora realized that here was the right person, 
 and gave herself up to the relief of being waited 
 on by her. Her release came December 24, 1878. 
 When they could do no more for her she bade 
 them leave her, crying, "I have lived alone; let 
 me die alone." And so she died—alone save 
 for Him in Whose service she had spent her life 
 —"not grudgingly or of necessity" but cheerfully 
 and willingly.
Her funeral was attended by all Walsall. By 
 a strange coincidence there were at the same 
 time the funerals of four paupers. Their 
 cortéges arrived first and filled the little chapel 
 so that Sister Dora's coffin was left on the porch. 
 The church service was read over the five at 
 once—as one of the nurses said: "Just as Sister 
 Dora would have wished—not to be divided, 
 even in death, from the poor people she loved 
  so well." The police were useless to keep the 
 people out of the cemetery, but it was a quiet, 
 reverent crowd that stood, every man with his 
 hat off, while the beautiful service at the grave 
 was read. Rich and poor, clergy and laymen, 
 bishops and the lowest of them she had worked 
 to help, all united in paying to her this last loving 
 tribute.
Her personality still colors Walsall. Among 
 all the monuments proposed for her the one that 
 the working people most desired was not the 
 home for convalescents that she herself wanted 
 to establish, but a statue of her, so that she 
 would be tangibly present to their children and 
 their children's children. As one humble workman 
 said: "Why, nobody knows better than I 
 do that we sha'n't forget her—no danger of 
 that; but I want her to be there, so that when 
 strangers come to the place and see her standing 
 up, they shall ask us, 'Who's that?' and then 
 we shall say, 'Who's that? Why, that's our 
 Sister Dora.'"
She stands there now, a beautiful statue, yet 
 not simply a thing of cold stone, but rather a 
 vital personality—their Sister Dora.
