dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Johnson_Noble Women of Our Time  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
X.
"Sister Dora" among the Sick and the 
 Suffering.
"Turn away from life's pageants, turn, 
 If its deep story thy heart would learn! 
 Ever too bright is that outward show, 
 Dazzling the eyes till they see not woe. 
 But lift the proud mantle which hides from thy view 
 The things thou shouldst gaze on, the sad and true, 
 Nor fear to survey what its folds conceal; 
 So must thy spirit be taught to feel."
The best sermon and the best commentary 
 upon the teaching of the Saviour is found 
 in lives devoted to "doing good." Without 
 this proof and evidence of Christianity 
 in practice, professions, creeds, and beliefs are of little 
 account. The Saviour went about his Father's work, 
 healing the sick, comforting the sorrowing, causing 
 the hearts of those with whom he came in contact to 
 burn within them; and those who would follow the 
 Saviour must imitate him in works of mercy, in deeds 
 of charity, and in unselfish lives.
"Sister Dora," whose name is a fragrance, and 
  whose noble deeds are deserving of perpetual remembrance, 
 was a sister whom the Saviour loved; and 
 we should not love her the less because she was not 
 quite perfect, and that she had weaknesses and failings 
 which detracted from an otherwise spotless life. 
 But who is perfect? He that is without failings 
 may be allowed to throw a stone at Sister Dora; but 
 we are well assured no stone will be thrown.
Dorothy Wyndlow Pattison, whose father, the 
 Rev. Mark James Pattison, was the rector of Hauxwell, 
 a little village near Richmond, was born on the 
 16th day of January 1832. She is described as 
 having been a very lovely child, but exceedingly 
 delicate, and subject to many infantile diseases; 
 through which she happily lived, owing to the care 
 of her sisters, by whom she was much loved. Fortunately, 
 her strength increased with her years, so 
 that she became a fine, strong, healthy girl, fond of 
 fun, drawing amusement and interest from every 
 source, and cheerfully catering for the pleasure of 
 those about her. Her first passion was for music 
 and riding, in which she made great proficiency. In 
 after life, her sweet voice, which had so often gladdened 
 her father's home in her early years, soothed 
 and stilled many a weary head in the hospital dormitories; 
 and many a maimed and suffering lad has 
 been eased of his pains by Sister Dora's tales of wild 
 runs across the moors, and exciting accounts of glorious 
 hunting days. Her father called her, as she 
  went singing about the house, "Sunshine;" a name 
 well deserved by the little girl, who brought pleasure 
 by her presence. An incident is related of her 
 early years, While travelling, "a schoolboy in the 
 village, who was specially attached to her, fell ill of 
 rheumatic fever. The boy's one longing was to see 
 'Miss Dora' again; and as he grew worse and worse, 
 and still she did not come home, he constantly prayed 
 that he might live to see her. On the day on which 
 she was expected, he sat up on his pillows intently 
 listening; and at last, long before any one else could 
 hear a sound of wheels, he exclaimed, 'There she 
 is! there's Miss Dora!' and sunk back." Dora went 
 to the poor lad, rendering him all kindly offices, until 
 he died.
But she was not only "Sunshine" to her young 
 schoolfellow, but all who knew her remembered her 
 glad and laughing spirits. "Her merry laugh still 
 rings in my ears," writes one of the neighbours. 
 Another said, "I have known nothing of Dora for 
 many years, but always think of her as the bright, 
 bonnie maiden, singing about the house." No doubt 
 she owed much of the physical vigour of her subsequent 
 life to the amusements of her early years. 
 No boy exhibited greater zest or interest in outdoor 
 games. She could run and jump, follow the fox or 
 hare, or join in a rat-hunt with all the enthusiasm of 
 a healthy lad. Her faults—for she had faults—were 
 self-will and pride, and a resolute resolve to have her 
  own way. In after-life, even these failings served 
 her in enabling her to achieve many things which 
 one less purposeless and resolved would have despaired 
 of achieving. They were failings, nevertheless, 
 and were in the course of her life the source of 
 much disquiet to Dora.
From her twentieth to her twenty-ninth year Dora 
 at home was dissatisfied with the comparative monotonous 
 life she led. At this time she had become a 
 finely developed, handsome woman, with strong 
 yearnings for work. When the news of Miss Nightingale's 
 labours in the Crimea reached her, she 
 bounded in spirit at the thought of joining the band 
 of nurses. But the consent of her father could not 
 be obtained, and the thought of work in the Crimean 
 hospitals had to be relinquished. There was work 
 at home, so her father said, if she would only think 
 so, sufficient to employ all her powers. This work, 
 despite a longing for a more extended field of labour, 
 was not neglected. Dora's mother was a great invalid, 
 and required great care and nursing. This 
 duty Dora cheerfully and lovingly divided with her 
 sister until her mother died; which event was very 
 sudden. Then Dora, in the exercise of her self-will, 
 and in opposition to her father's desires, resolved 
 upon obtaining some employment from home. She 
 made the acquaintance of "the Sisters of the Good 
 Samaritans," who have cottage hospitals in various 
 places. To join these sisters, and to work with them 
  in their humane labours, seemed to Dora the realization 
 of her utmost desire. Her father strongly objected 
 to the religious opinions of the sisters, and did 
 all he could short of absolutely forbidding her to join 
 them. Dora, however, in the exercise of her determined 
 self-will, would not be controlled. She lived 
 to repent her disobedience; and when upon her deathbed 
 she said: "I was very wilful; I did very wrong. 
 Let no one take me for an example."
Her first employment after leaving home was as 
 schoolmistress in the village of Little Woolston, in 
 Buckinghamshire. She conducted the school for 
 three years admirably, when an attack of pleurisy 
 compelled her to return to Redcar, the head-quarters 
 of the Sisters of the Good Samaritans, when she joined 
 the association, going into the Home at Coatham, and 
 thenceforth being known as "Sister Dora." In the 
 Home she was subjected to a severe discipline, which 
 no doubt she had not contemplated. "She made 
 beds, cleaned and scoured floors and grates, swept 
 and dusted, and finally became a cook in the kitchen." 
 She was at length relieved from this drudgery by 
 being sent to a small cottage hospital at North 
 Ormesby, near Middlesborough. Early in 1865 she 
 was sent to a cottage hospital in Walsall, near Birmingham. 
 As accidents were very frequent in the 
 district, and as it was inconvenient to send cases 
 requiring immediate attention to Birmingham, an 
 accident hospital was opened by the Sisters of the 
  Good Samaritans. Sister Mary, who had the first 
 charge of the hospital, and who had nobly done her 
 duty in establishing the hospital, fell ill, and had to 
 be removed to Bournemouth. Dora had to take her 
 place, and as the immediate result caught the smallpox 
 from one of the out-patients; from which, after 
 much suffering, she recovered.
At the outset the little hospital was not free from 
 opposition. The sisters were not unfrequently insulted 
 and jostled in the streets of the town. Upon 
 one occasion, as Dora was walking rather late in the 
 evening to visit a patient, a boy shouted, "There 
 goes one of those Sisters of Misery!" at the same time 
 throwing a stone which cut open her forehead. Some 
 time after, an accident having occurred in one of the 
 coal pits, this lad, whom Dora had not failed to observe, 
 was brought in among the wounded to the 
 hospital. Dora immediately noted the lad, saying to 
 herself, "That's my man!" and busied herself for his 
 relief and comfort. "One night when he was recovering, 
 she found him quietly crying. 'I wouldn't 
 ask him what was the matter,' Dora said, when relating 
 the story, 'because I knew well enough, and 
 I wanted him to confess.' At length it came out 
 with many sobs: 'Sister, I threw that stone at you.' 
 'Oh,' she replied, 'did you think I did not know 
 that? Why, I knew you the very first minute you 
 came in at the door.' 'What!' returned he; 'you 
 knew me, and have been nursing me like this?' 
  'You see,' added Sister Dora, 'it was his first practical 
 experience of good returned for evil, and he 
 didn't know what to make of it.'" 
The field-sports and open-air exercises of her 
 earlier years no doubt fitted her to undergo a peculiar 
 trial. The celebrated Sir James Simpson of 
 Edinburgh had visited the Home to select a nurse 
 to look after an old lady who was nearly insane. 
 Although Dora, at the time of Sir James's visit, had 
 her sleeves tucked up and was making a pudding, 
 his selection immediately fell upon her. "Send me 
 that sister; she is the one for my case." One night 
 as she sat up with the old lady, who seemed to be 
 asleep, Dora sat at the window calmly enjoying the 
 peaceful night. Suddenly and noiselessly the old 
 woman sprung out of bed, and seizing Dora by the 
 shoulder, brandished a long knife over her head! Dora, 
 perfectly unmoved, without uttering a word, looked 
 calmly at her. "I wanted to see if I could frighten 
 you," said the poor half-mad woman. From that 
 time, however, she made no similar attempt.
In 1865 Dora was sent back to Walsall, when she 
 became, what the Walsall people always afterwards 
 called her, "our sister." A proposal was afterwards 
 made that she should be removed to Middlesborough; 
 but the committee and medical men connected with 
 the hospital, who had become aware of her fitness 
 for the work of caring for the sick, strongly remonstrated 
 against her removal, and happily succeeded 
  in detaining Dora. In the December of the same 
 year she was ordered to go to Devonshire to attend 
 upon a private patient. The committee desired that 
 some other nurse should be sent, and that Dora 
 should be allowed to remain at Walsall. Before an 
 answer was received in reply, a letter came from her 
 home telling her that her father was dangerously ill, 
 and that he desired to see her at once. She telegraphed 
 to the Home at Coatham the condition of 
 her father and his earnest desire to see her, asking that 
 another nurse might be sent to the private patient, 
 so that she might be permitted to go to her father 
 immediately. It seems beyond belief that so strange 
 and unnatural an answer should have been returned: 
 "No; you must go at once to Devonshire." How 
 gladly would we write that Dora despised the cruel 
 order, and that she at once started for her home at 
 Hauxwell; but no,—she obeyed her self-chosen 
 masters and proceeded to Devonshire! Scarcely had 
 she arrived when the news reached her that her 
 father was dead. Then the inhuman sisterhood 
 granted her a tardy permission to attend the funeral. 
 To this Dora replied, that as permission was not 
 given her to see her father when alive, she did not 
 care to go now that he was dead. The thoughts and 
 feelings of the superior of the sisterhood when contemplating 
 her conduct are not to be envied. It had 
 the effect at once of opening a breach in the regards 
 which Dora entertained for the Order of the Good 
  Samaritans, which was never healed. In time the 
 yoke which must have galled years of Dora's life was 
 thrown off.
To lighten the great trial to which she had been 
 so unfeelingly subjected, Dora devoted herself, with 
 all the energy of her active nature, to her duties. 
 She resolved thoroughly to understand what would 
 enable her to be a reliable surgical nurse, and shortly 
 attained great coolness and proficiency in dressing 
 wounds and attending to the many maimed patients 
 brought into the little hospital. Ultimately Dora, by 
 study and patient observation, attained to extraordinary 
 surgical excellence. There were not wanting 
 friends who would have had her relinquish what 
 seemed to them painful and unwomanly duties; but 
 Dora, feeling that her future happiness must consist 
 in work, firmly resolved to devote herself to the 
 good of others. She did say, however, at the close 
 of her life: "If I had to begin life over again, I 
 would marry; because a woman ought to live with a 
 man, and be in subjection."
When Dora had resolved to devote her life to 
 duties imposed by herself, she depended upon her 
 own strength; but presently she learned to lean upon 
 her Saviour, who ever after became the source of all 
 her comfort and the fountain of her heart's inward 
 joy. She owed much of her spiritual strength to the 
 companionship and teaching of the incumbent of the 
 church of St. James, Wednesbury—the Rev. Richard 
  Twigg—who, it was said after his death, had "buried 
 talents which would have won the admiration of the 
 world, in the smokiest dens of the Black Country." 
 He not only praised and prompted Dora to good 
 works, but kindly and firmly reproved faults which 
 others only smoothed over.
The needs of the increasing town of Walsall 
 demanded a larger and better-conditioned hospital; 
 which was erected in a salubrious position, and of 
 which Dora took entire charge. Here she had the 
 fullest opportunity, not only of exercising the marvellous 
 skill which she had acquired in setting broken 
 limbs, in sewing and joining wounds, and performing 
 other surgical operations, but of increasing her practical 
 knowledge by laborious study, which enabled her 
 to become competent to take charge of the most difficult 
 and dangerous cases. But this power, the result 
 of painstaking acquirement, was aided and helped by 
 a personal influence which wonderfully affected the 
 sufferers in the hospital. Dora's beauty, and her 
 gentle and high-bred sympathy, marvellously subdued 
 the rough natures of the colliers and iron-workers 
 who were under her care. Not unfrequently 
 she could induce them to submit to operations which 
 were not less dangerous than severely painful, when 
 the entreaties of friends and relatives failed to obtain 
 consent. Upon one occasion a poor fellow was told 
 that the only means of saving his life was to amputate 
 his leg. He had been carefully nursed for three 
  months with the hope of saving the limb; but now 
 hope was gone. Father and brother pleaded in vain; 
 he would not consent to lose his leg. At length 
 "sister came," and talked so cheerfully and persuasively, 
 that he "thought he could face it" if 
 "sister" would be by. Next day the limb was taken 
 off, and the man's life was saved. But Dora was 
 more anxious to save limbs than to witness their 
 destruction. She spared neither pains nor labour to 
 accomplish this object. When upon one occasion a 
 fine healthy young man was brought into the hospital, 
 with his arm torn and twisted by a machine, 
 the doctor declared that nothing could save it, and 
 that it must be taken off at once. The poor mangled 
 fellow looked piteously at Dora, and cried, "O 
 sister, save my arm for me! It's my right arm!" 
 After looking carefully at the mangled arm, Dora 
 turned to the surgeon, saying, "I believe I can save 
 this arm, if you will let me try." "Are you mad?" 
 was the reply. "I tell you it's impossible—mortification 
 will set in in a few hours. Nothing but 
 amputation can save his life." Dora, turning to the 
 poor fellow, said, "Are you willing for me to try 
 and save your arm, my man?" The look which 
 Dora gave him, and the feeling sympathy expressed 
 in her voice, would have induced him to do anything. 
 The surgeon then most unwillingly gave his consent, 
 saying, as he did so, "He will die!" For three weeks 
 Dora attended "her arm," as she called it, almost 
  night and day. "How I prayed over that arm!" 
 she said afterwards. But the arm was saved. Years 
 afterwards, when Dora lay ill in the hospital, the 
 grateful fellow whose arm had been preserved used 
 to walk eleven miles into Walsall to ask how she 
 was. "Tell sister her arm pulled the bell!" and then 
 he would tramp back again.
Dora's life in the hospital was no child's play. It 
 was hard work both of head and hands. Dora, however, 
 knew the secret of getting successfully through 
 work and of subduing trouble. The secret, which 
 ought to be no secret, was cheerfulness. Her bright, 
 cheery spirit would flash out upon the poor fellows 
 in their beds; and when Sister Dora gave them their 
 breakfasts, after making their beds comfortable—
 which work was done at half-past six in the morning 
 —the sleepless night, possibly, and the pains which 
 had to be endured, would all be forgotten in her 
 presence and charmed away by her pleasant and 
 inspiriting words. It is no wonder that these big 
 rough fellows learned to love Dora. They had never 
 come in contact with a human being like her—"so 
 beautiful, so good, so tender-hearted, so strong and 
 so gentle, so full of fun and humour, and of sympathy 
 for broken hearts as well as for every other 
 kind of fracture, and the best friend that many of 
 these poor maimed men had ever known." When 
 the breakfast was over, Dora read prayers on the 
 staircase lobby, so that the patients in all the wards 
  could hear her. After prayers, Dora went round 
 with the doctor and saw all the patients; and then, 
 at twelve o'clock, carved the dinner, sending to each 
 a portion of any little choice dish sent for her own 
 use. At two o'clock the out-patients, from sixty to 
 one hundred, had to be seen and spoken to,—knowing 
 all their names and having an interest in them 
 all. The dressings and small operations were left 
 to her care. After this labour came the patients' 
 tea, which they would rather defer for hours than 
 not receive it at her hands. At six o'clock the 
 nurses sat down to their own meal with Dora, who 
 was rarely permitted to end it before being called 
 away, smilingly saying, as she went about the new 
 duty, "There is no peace for the wicked."
The great charm of Dora's presence in the hospital 
 was her cheerfulness. She told funny stories, read 
 interesting books, had something fresh every day 
 about the town or the out-patients to tell the sufferers 
 on their beds. One big Irishman said, "She makes 
 you laugh—yes, if you were dying." It was a part 
 of Dora's hospital system to keep the patients 
 interestingly engaged. She would lead and encourage 
 a buzz of conversation in the wards, all the 
 while busy with her own duties. At times, when 
 her busy life would permit, which was very rare, 
 she would sit down to a game of draughts or chess 
 with one of the patients, whose delight at the honour 
 may be imagined. Never in her presence, and seldom 
  in her absence, would foul language be heard. "Stop 
 that !" she said curtly when a man swore. "I must 
 say something when the pain's so bad, sister." 
 "Then say 'poker and tongs'—nothing else, remember." 
 All this was done so naturally, without 
 the smallest affectation, that it had the happiest 
 result. Upon those who believed that there is no 
 God and no future—and such were at times brought 
 into the hospital—Dora's sermon of daily life, her 
 self-denial and cheerfulness, her willing performance 
 of menial tasks, and her observant care of themselves, 
 made a deep and lasting impression. Often 
 in the dead of night would they awake to find her 
 by their bedside praying that they might be enlightened 
 in their minds and hearts. No wonder 
 that they came to a better mind, and acknowledged 
 that there was something in the religion which they 
 had despised and treated with contempt.
But it was not only in the hospital that Dora 
 made her presence felt. There was no dark and 
 black spot in the town, where sin and suffering had 
 found a home, that was not visited by Dora. And 
 when small-pox was in nearly all the homes of the 
 poor people, every moment that she could spare from 
 the hospital, without a thought of herself, she would 
 spend in the infected streets and houses. Upon one 
 occasion she entered a house where a man was dying 
 of black pox in its worst form. All in fear and 
 dread had left the poor fellow to die alone. The 
  last morsel of candle expired as Dora sat by the 
 bedside. As it did so, the man made one last effort 
 to sit up, and said, "Sister, kiss me before I die." 
 Dora instantly took the loathsome object in her arms 
 and impressed a kiss upon him; then sitting through 
 the long night in the darkness, she only discovered 
 by the gray light of the morning that the man was 
 dead! Dora, although singularly subject to contagion, 
 passed through this and a more severe subsequent 
 small-pox visitation without injury.
But active and busy as Dora's life was, in the 
 midst of so many grateful and loving hearts she 
 was yet alone. She lacked, as she heartily desired, 
 human sympathy, and that fellowship and equal 
 intercourse which makes life a joy and happiness. 
 She found, or thought she had found, all that her 
 utmost desires needed in the society of a gentleman 
 who learned to love her with his whole heart, and 
 whose love she returned with all the fervour of her 
 confiding nature. During the time of this intercourse, 
 for it endured only for a time, Dora experienced 
 unalloyed happiness, save in one respect—
 her lover disbelieved the truths of that religion 
 which was Dora's inspiration and source of strength. 
 It must have been a terrible struggle to give him 
 up—the only being that had obtained her affections 
 and undivided love. But Dora saw that otherwise 
 she would imperil her spiritual happiness here and 
 hereafter, and she resolved that the connection should 
  cease. But this was not done without the most 
 painful struggle, and a weary turning away from 
 the idol set up in her heart to the duties of the 
 hospital, in the hope that its cares would dissipate 
 the remembrance of the life-trial through which she 
 had passed. How much she was affected by the 
 strain upon her affections was seen when one night 
 she fainted upon one of the patients' beds. Dora's 
 religion, however, was too sincere and heartfelt to 
 allow her for one moment to doubt that she had 
 adopted the right course. Life, for her, was religion; 
 and religion was life. When a servant was about 
 to be engaged for the hospital, Dora said, "Tell her 
 this is not an ordinary house, or even hospital; I 
 want her to understand that all who serve here, in 
 whatever capacity, ought to have one rule, 
love for 
 God,
 and then I need not say love for their work. I 
 wish we could use, and really mean, the word Maison-Dieu" 
 (God's Hospital).
The love which the patients who had been in the 
 hospital had for her was pleasantly evidenced in the 
 year 1871, when the servants of the South Staffordshire 
 Railway subscribed among themselves £50, 
 with which they bought a small carriage and pony 
 to present to her. Dora thought at first that it 
 would be almost useless owing to her want of time 
 to employ it; but it was found useful in taking 
 convalescents out for refreshing rides, and carrying 
 Dora to the many sick and afflicted homes that she 
  constantly visited. The thought naturally occurs, in 
 learning of the many loving remembrances that were 
 treasured by the patients who had been under Dora's 
 care, that if more would convert their Christianity 
 into active life, the reign of peace and love would 
 not be so distant.
In 1875, for the third time, small-pox broke out 
 in Walsall, spreading with terrible rapidity. An epidemic 
 hospital had been built, but the poor people 
 had a strange objection to enter it. "They would 
 far rather die at home. They were not afraid. Why 
 could they not be let alone?" These answers, which 
 were so general, threatened to make the hospital 
 useless. Dora, however, came to the rescue. She 
 offered to take charge of the hospital, and during her 
 absence to delegate her own work to the charge of 
 the lady nurses. The offer was gladly accepted, as 
 it was well known that Sister Dora's name would 
 overcome all scruples to enter the hospital. When 
 the decision was known, the news was everywhere 
 repeated, "Sister is going to the epidemic hospital." 
 There was then no difficulty in getting patients. 
 The work was commenced at once. The twenty-eight 
 beds were soon filled with patients in every 
 stage of the dreaded disease. She had little or no 
 help. The porter was an old man, who, when sober, 
 was kind and attentive, but who had frequent spells 
 of drinking, which kept him out the whole night, 
 leaving Dora alone with the dead and the dying. She 
  had also the occasional help of two old women from 
 the workhouse to assist her in washing the loathsome 
 clothes and bedding. Her situation was not 
 free from personal danger, independent of the danger 
 of contagion. One night a big fellow, a collier, in 
 his delirium, jumped out of bed and tried to make 
 his escape. Dora, however, brought all her strength 
 to bear upon him, forced him back upon his bed, and 
 held him there till morning!
Dora was not quite forsaken in her lonely and 
 loathsome home. The doctor, of course, visited the 
 hospital regularly; and the secretary of the Cottage 
 Hospital had learned to love Dora, to the extent, if 
 needs be, of laying down his life for her. He brought 
 her news of the patients in the hospital, fresh-cut 
 flowers, books and papers that he thought would 
 afford her a moment's interest. An old patient 
 named Chell, an engine-stoker, was a constant visitor. 
 When he was in the Cottage Hospital, Dora nursed 
 him through a severe accident to his ankle; and 
 then, owing to a railway accident, his leg had to be 
 amputated. Chell said he did not remember anything 
 about the operation, except,—"when I came 
 to after the chloroform, Sister Dora was on her knees 
 by my side, with her arm supporting my head, and 
 she was repeating—
'They climbed the steep ascent of heaven
Through peril, toil, and pain:
O God, to us may grace be given
To follow in their train.'"
  
The poor fellow never wearied of repeating these 
 words, or remembering the tones of Sister Dora's 
 voice. No wonder that he was a constant visitor 
 at the small-pox hospital. Chell was one of the 
 visitors permitted to visit the Cottage Hospital on 
 Sundays, and to join in the hospital service. He said 
 he could sing "till he was hoarse" with Sister Dora.
The strength that was given her of God—for Dora 
 would acknowledge no other source of her capability 
 to labour—enabled her to pass through the fearful 
 trial without contracting the dreaded disease. Her 
 strength and resolution were extraordinary. The 
 doctor of the small-pox hospital said: "Sister Dora 
 could sit up at night, and work all day, with little 
 or no rest, and, as far as I am able to judge, she was 
 neither physically nor mentally the worse for it. 
 Her strength was superhuman. I never saw such a 
 woman." After six long months the epidemic was 
 subdued, and Dora returned to the Cottage Hospital 
 and her loved work as quietly as she had left it.
On Friday, the 15th of October 1875, a fearful 
 accident at one of the furnaces near Walsall occurred. 
 The hot metal, which burst out of the furnace, 
 flowed on to eleven poor fellows who were 
 engaged at the mouth. When taken to the hospital 
 they were more like charred logs than human beings. 
 The cries of the poor sufferers were dreadful. 
 Some lost all pain by losing consciousness in death. 
 Dora might well have been distracted by the cries 
  with which she was assailed:—"Sister, come and 
 dress me!" "Do dress me!" "Oh, you don't 
 know how bad I am!" Dora gave them brandy, 
 and rendered them all the assistance in her power; 
 "but it was awful work." Both sight and smell 
 were terrible. The medical men who hurried to 
 render assistance were incessantly sick and could 
 hardly stay in the ward. The scene was horrible; 
 and yet Dora stayed and worked without a thought 
 of herself. Only two of the poor fellows survived, 
 notwithstanding all the care she unceasingly bestowed 
 upon them.
But Dora was not less resolute and courageous in 
 efforts to cure the soul as well as the body. On the 
 occasion of a mission in Walsall she induced two of 
 the clergymen to hold a midnight service in a room 
 in the worst part of the town. As they turned down 
 a narrow court, Dora said, "Now keep close to me. 
 I am safe enough; but your lives are not worth a 
 moment's purchase if you are seen down here without 
 me to protect you." Looking through one of 
 the windows of a house, a number of women were 
 seen sitting at a table, as if receiving orders from 
 an ill-looking man. On knocking at the door, and 
 answering the question "Who's there?" with "Sister 
 Dora," a volley of oaths was heard, with the question, 
 "What do you mean by coming here at this 
 time of night?" Dora merely answered, "Open the 
 door; it's sister. I want to speak to you." When 
  the door was opened, she addressed the man: "Why, 
 Bill, what possesses you to treat me like this? Don't 
 you remember what you told me the last time you 
 came up to have that head seen to?" The only 
 answer she received were growls and muttered oaths, 
 and "be quick and say what she wanted." "I'll 
 tell you what I want," Dora said, advancing into the 
 room and taking each of the women by the hand, 
 severally addressing them, "Well, Lizzie," or "Mary, 
 how are you?" Then addressing them all, she said, 
 "I want you all to go down on your knees with me 
 now, this moment, and say a prayer to God." To 
 the astonishment of the clergymen, the man and the 
 women immediately knelt down, and Dora uttered 
 a prayer from her inmost heart for her "brothers 
 and sisters" who knelt with her. When the prayer 
 was ended, the man said, "I'm very sorry, sister, I 
 was so rude to you. I didn't mean it; you've been 
 good to me." All were then persuaded to go into 
 the little mission room to hear the addresses of 
 the clergymen. Night after night, through Dora's 
 influence, midnight meetings were held, attended by 
 the worst men and women of the vilest parts of the 
 town. When the mission week was ended, Dora 
 still kept up midnight, classes, in the hope of rescuing 
 some of the poor women from their lives of 
 shame. Dora then held classes for the cab-drivers, 
 whose constant exposure to all weathers had excited 
 her sympathy.
  
In the midst of her valued labours, just as a new 
 hospital was being erected, in which she hoped to 
 spend many useful years, cancer developed itself, and 
 she was told that she must die. The trial was severe, 
 but her life had been a preparation for any event 
 that her Father might send her. If her opportunity 
 for work was limited, the more need that every 
 moment should be employed; and it was employed, 
 both inside and outside the hospital, as though every 
 moment was the prelude to the last. Every moment 
 was grudged that was not usefully used. All her 
 evenings were spent in visiting, not merely the respectable, 
 for whom she had earnest words, but, as 
 she called them, the rag-tags of the town. No time 
 spent with the poorest who were hastening to the 
 grave was grudged. Many a wretched creature 
 breathed her last breath while reposing upon Dora's 
 breast; and none departed without the way of 
 life being made plain. Her midnight meetings, 
 which were continued, opened every door to her in 
 the vilest slums of the town; and wherever she 
 went, into whatever company, deference and respect, 
 instead of insults and injury, were shown to Dora. 
 But strong as her frame had been—and it must have 
 been made of iron, not to have been weakened by 
 her many labours—it now gave evidence of the existence 
 of disease which could not be concealed. But 
 this in no way was permitted to interfere with her 
 work. The pony-carriage was still employed in 
  the evenings, not only to carry her to the poor people 
 in the town, but to the outlying villages where 
 there were any sick to be succoured or wretchedness 
 to be relieved. Her many patients and poor 
 friends who looked to her for material and spiritual 
 aid, had no idea that Sister Dora had a disease that 
 would only terminate with her death. She went 
 about her work with her old spirit and cheerfulness; 
 the canker-worm which was eating out her life was 
 concealed from every eye, and was not revealed to 
 relative or the dearest friend. One reason, and the 
 reason is not difficult to understand in Dora, was 
 that she had a dread of sympathy and pity. While 
 no good could come of such expressions and exhibitions 
 of feeling, her labours would be interfered with, 
 and she would be prevented from pursuing her work 
 in her own way.
As the old hospital had to be pulled down before 
 the new one could be finished, Dora had at length 
 the opportunity for a much-needed holiday. She 
 went first to spend a few days with her nieces in the 
 Isle of Man, where she exhibited all the exuberance 
 of spirits which had always characterized her. Afterwards 
 she went to Paris to see and study in the 
 Exhibition the wonderful instruments and appliances 
 used in surgical operations. She did this knowing 
 the brief period which would be permitted to her to 
 use the knowledge thus acquired. On returning to 
 London she obtained permission to attend and witness 
  Professor Lister's operations, with the view of 
 introducing his system of treatment of wounds into the 
 Walsall Hospital. But now that which was of most 
 concern was the terrible disease which could no 
 longer be concealed in her own frame. One of the 
 London doctors proposed to examine her chest; but 
 this would have revealed all,—an exposure to a 
 stranger of the certain seeds of death from which 
 she shrank with unconcealed dread. She hastened 
 to consult her former medical adviser in Birmingham, 
 the journey adding materially to the worst symptoms 
 of the fatal disease, so that it almost seemed that she 
 would never leave the hotel in which she had taken 
 her residence alive. Her strong desire was now to 
 go to Walsall, earnestly and fervently expressed, 
 "Let me die among my own people." When it was 
 possible to remove her, she was carefully taken to a 
 small house in Walsall, hastily prepared for her, as 
 the new hospital was not ready to receive her.
But in the midst of all this sorrow and suffering, 
 Dora's faith and assurance were firm and immovable. 
 She wrote to a friend: "I can join in the words 
 of our beautiful Prayer-book,—'Render unto Him 
 humble thanks for his fatherly visitation!' Do 
 pray, dear brother, that, as my pain increases, so may 
 my faith and patience. I have not had two hours' 
 sleep for four days and nights; but in the midst of 
 the fiery furnace there was a form like unto the Son 
 of God." But the dear people whom Dora had so 
  tenderly and lovingly served would not believe that 
 Dora was to die. "Her'll get well," "Her never can 
 be going to die," were the general expressions. They 
 could not think that the strong woman they had 
 seen in the hospital lifting them about as if they 
 were children, was going to die. When, however, 
 they learned that there was no hope, that Dora must 
 die, the feeling of pain which settled upon the hearts 
 of the people is indescribable. Up to the last they 
 hoped against hope, trusting that in some way God 
 in his own good providence would restore to them 
 Sister Dora. But it was not to be. Through much 
 pain and suffering the end was speedily to come. 
 But it was not to come without hope. The hope 
 which filled Dora's heart as she lay upon her deathbed 
 was well expressed in the hymn which she loved, 
 "Rest comes at length, though life be long and 
 weary." Writing from her bed of continual pain, 
 she said: "My heart is so full of thankfulness for 
 the Good Shepherd's tender care and love towards 
 me. I am so happy. I have not a care; it is all 
 sunshine. God has taken away the fear of death, 
 and all sorrow at parting with life." This hopeful, 
 glad spirit was at times clouded with doubts and 
 fears; and as her disease increased, so did its pains, 
 until she was compelled, with all her brave heroic spirit, 
 to confess that she was suffering torture! "But," she 
 would add, "I want it all; the more I suffer, the 
 more I feel I need it. I am in God's hands now."
  
While she lay thus suffering upon her death-bed, 
 the new hospital was opened—opened in Dora's 
 name, without her longed-for and desired presence. 
 Her sufferings, which had now become continuous 
 and intense, did not prevent her from taking the 
 keenest interest in its every detail, and discussing 
 with the surgeon and the nurses the best plans for 
 its successful working. The several cases, as they 
 were brought into the hospital, were reported to her, 
 and instructions as to treatment and nursing were 
 received from her. In the midst of all her pain she 
 never, if possible, refused to see visitors, receiving 
 them with much cheerfulness, and speaking kind and 
 encouraging words. As the end approached, one 
 who was constantly with Dora wrote: "I feel that I 
 cannot give you any true idea of those last hours 
 that I spent with her, or of the vivid remembrance I 
 have of her, as her brave and loving spirit waited for 
 the moment when God would call her to the full, unclouded 
 daylight of eternity, into the dawn of which 
 she seemed already to have entered." It was on the 
 24th day of December 1878 that Dora entered her 
 eternal home. She had for two days passed through 
 intense suffering with great resignation and patience. 
 As the next day was Christmas-day, Dora cried repeatedly, 
 "Oh, I hope I shall sing my Christmas 
 carol in heaven!" All doubts were now gone,—she 
 saw the Lord Jesus at the gates of heaven, the gates 
 of which were open wide to receive her. And then, 
  when the last moments were come, she said to the 
 many kind friends who filled the room, "I have lived 
 alone, let me die alone," and only ceased repeating 
 the words, "let me die alone," when all had left. 
 One friend, however, would watch through the half-opened 
 door. For some hours she still lived on; and 
 then, about two in the afternoon, by a change in 
 Dora's position, the watcher knew that she had departed 
 to that home where pain and suffering give 
 place to peace and joy.
The funeral, which had all been arranged by Dora, 
 was to be plainly and quietly conducted, without 
 scarfs, hat-bands, or trappings of any kind; and, if 
 possible, the coffin was to be carried to the grave by 
 some of the railway servants whom she had nursed 
 in the hospital. This wish was immediately responded 
 to by eighteen men who volunteered to be 
 her bearers. The funeral procession needed not outward 
 trappings to indicate the sorrow felt by the 
 thousands who followed the dear remains of Dora. 
 The rich and the poor, men of all churches and creeds, 
 joined lovingly together to pay a last tribute to the 
 noble woman who had spent her life, like her divine 
 Master, "going about doing good." No wonder that 
 the many whom she had served, and to whom her 
 presence had been a joy and delight, desired that a 
 monument should be erected to her memory; not 
 that they needed to be reminded of her, but, as one 
 of the railway men said, "Nobody knows better 
  than I do that we shan't forget her—no danger of 
 that; but I want her to be there, so that when 
 strangers come to the place and see her standing up, 
 they shall ask us, 'Who's that?' and then we shall 
 say, 'Who's that? why, that's our Sister Dora'"
Thus would we live; and therefore pray
For strength renewed, that we may say,
Our life, it upward tends:
If we who sing must sometimes sigh,
Yet life, beginning with a cry,
In hallelujah ends."
