dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Reed_Happy Women  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
Sister Dora
   
  
Sister Dora
Side by side with the name of Florence 
 Nightingale stands that of Dorothy 
 Wyndlow Pattison, familiarly and affectionately 
 known as "Sister Dora." She 
 was born in Yorkshire, England, in 1832, 
 and her childhood was much like that of 
 other children not destined for great work 
 and lasting fame.
It is recorded that, in her early youth, 
 she and her sister were given velvet 
 bonnets which they chose to consider ugly. 
 One day when the two children were left 
 alone in the house, Dorothy whispered, 
 "Come, now is our chance!" It was 
 raining hard, and the inclement weather 
 gave the ingenious Dorothy a bright idea. 
 They put on the hated bonnets, opened 
  the window, and leaned out into the 
 pouring rain. When the velvet was 
 thoroughly saturated, they returned them 
 to the bandboxes. On the following Sunday, 
 when invited to get ready for church, 
 Dorothy explained airily that they could 
 not go until they had new bonnets, as the 
 others were quite unpresentable. The 
 excuse was not accepted, nor did the 
 new bonnets materialise, but Dorothy 
 and her sister were forced, all winter 
 long, to wear the despised and injured 
 headgear, in the exact condition in which 
 it was found!
When she was fourteen, Dorothy had a 
 long and dangerous illness from which she 
 did not recover for months. At that 
 time, England was swept by a great popular 
 enthusiasm inspired by Miss Nightingale's 
 wonderful work in the Crimea, and, though 
 far too young, and not strong enough to 
 take even a short journey, Dorothy begged 
  
Sister Dora
From the statue erected to her memory
   unceasingly to be allowed to join Miss 
 Nightingale and help her in her work.
For years after her recovery she persisted 
 in her desire to leave home and 
 become a trained nurse. Her father continually 
 opposed it, but finally gave in, 
 when she was twenty-five. He refused 
 to make her any allowance beyond what 
 he had always given her for clothing and 
 pin money, so she was obliged to find a way 
 in which to earn the balance.
For three years she lived alone in a 
 small cottage, teaching school and doing 
 all her own housework. The villagers 
 were much astonished to discover that a 
 woman might be a "real lady" and yet soil 
 her hands continually with tasks which 
 seemed degrading.
Finding it impossible to secure otherwise 
 the longed-for training, she joined 
 a High Church sisterhood at Coatham, 
 called the Sisterhood of the Good Samaritans, 
  and was henceforth called "Sister 
 Dora."
The training and discipline of the Sisterhood 
 were rigid in the extreme. The idea 
 was to humble pride, and to inculcate submissiveness 
 and reverence for authority. 
 Sister Dora was one day ordered to make 
 all the beds in the establishment, and, having 
 done so, was invited to pull them all 
 to pieces and do it over. She scrubbed 
 floors, and people came in purposely, with 
 mud and ashes, and made the floors dirty 
 again. Then she was ordered to scrub 
 once more. She also cooked, cleaned 
 grates and stoves, built fires, carried out 
 ashes, and washed dishes—all with dignity 
 and cheerfulness.
She was sent by the Sisterhood, when 
 her novitiate was over, to a small hospital 
 in Walsall. Toward the end of the year, 
 she received orders to leave the hospital 
 and take a private case in the 
  southern part of England. The people 
 of Walsall objected to her leaving and 
 framed a petition to the Sisterhood. At 
 this time, she received word of her father's 
 dangerous illness, and telegraphed to the 
 Mother Superior, asking permission to go 
 to him. This was immediately and sternly 
 refused and she was ordered at once to 
 Devonshire. With aching heart, she went. 
 On reaching her patient's home, she learned 
 that her father was dead. Then the Sisterhood, 
 too late, relaxed its discipline, and 
 wrote to her: "You may attend your 
 father's funeral, if you please." Bitterly, 
 she answered thus: "When my father was 
 alive, you did not permit me to go to him. 
 Now that he is dead, I no longer care to go."
Yet for ten years she continued to be a 
 devoted member of the Sisterhood. She 
 returned to Walsall, and among the poor, 
 the ignorant, and the afflicted, carried the 
 gospel of cleanliness and hope.
  
Once, when the impression got abroad 
 that the "Good Samaritans" were papists, 
 the hospital was stoned by a mob from the 
 coal mines. Sister Dora was badly cut 
 on the forehead and carried the scar to 
 her dying day. Before her wound had 
 healed, however, the lad who threw the 
 stone was carried into the hospital, badly 
 hurt. Sister Dora recognised him, and 
 gave him special care. One day, during 
 his convalescence, he confessed, sobbing,
 "Sister, I threw that stone at you."
"Yes," she answered, quietly, "I know. 
 I knew it as soon as you were brought in 
 here."
"You knew," cried the boy, in wonder 
 and admiration, "and yet you have been 
 taking care of me like this!"
She was once given charge of an old 
 lady who was violently insane, and whom 
 everyone else feared to approach. Sister 
 Dora's gentleness, patience, and tact won 
  the poor creature's affections, and eventually, 
 through love, the old lady became 
 cured. Long afterward, in speaking of 
 it, Sister Dora said, "I had an uncommonly 
 pleasant time with that mad old lady!"
Loving all deeply and unselfishly, Sister 
 Dora inspired her patients with that 
 answering love through which miracles 
 are wrought. Once, when holding a badly 
 burned child in her arms, Sister Dora 
 whispered, "Hush, don't cry; Sister's 
 got you!" "Oh," sobbed the child, 
 "when you get to heaven, Sister Dora, 
 I'll be waiting at the gate for you with a 
 bouquet of flowers!"
By skilled nursing, she saved a badly 
 injured arm which the surgeons said would 
 have to be amputated. The man ever 
 afterward alluded to it gratefully as "Sister 
 Dora's arm." When she was ill and he 
 had fully recovered, he would walk eleven 
 miles to the hospital every Sunday morning, 
  to ask for her. He never failed to 
 leave this characteristic message: "Tell 
 her it's her arm that rang the bell."
Twice she served through smallpox epidemics. 
 At the second one an ambulance 
 was provided in Walsall to take the 
 stricken ones to the hospital. Sister Dora 
 would drive to a house, enter unannounced, 
 and say she had come to take the patient 
 to the hospital. Resistance was useless, 
 for Sister Dora was strong, and more than 
 once she simply took an unwilling patient 
 in her arms, either man or woman, deposited 
 her ailing burden in the ambulance, 
 and drove on. It is said that the whole 
 town was cheered and kept from panic 
 by the frequent passing of the ambulance 
 and Sister Dora "with her jolly face smiling 
 out of the window."
For six months she was practically 
 alone in a hospital full of smallpox patients. 
 She never had her bonnet on and went no 
  farther than the gate, yet, from here, she 
 wrote to a friend: "I am still a prisoner, 
 surrounded by my lepers. I do feel so 
 thankful that I came. I thank God daily 
 for my life here."
Eventually, she left the Sisterhood, and 
 continued her work unhampered by restrictions. 
 "I am a woman," she explained, 
 "and not a piece of furniture." 
 She renounced marriage with the man she 
 loved that she might continue in her profession. 
 "The world needs me more than 
 he does," she said, "and I can never give 
 up my work."
At forty-four, Sister Dora was stricken 
 with an incurable disease. The surgeon 
 whom she consulted told her that an operation 
 might prolong her life, but could not 
 save it. She insisted that the fact be kept 
 secret—and went on with her work.
Knowing that her days were numbered, 
 she was eager to crowd in as much of life 
  as possible. She went to London to study 
 a new antisepticising process; she went to 
 the Paris Exposition to see new surgical 
 appliances. Incredible as it may seem, 
 she became more sunny and cheerful than 
 ever. She was more self-sacrificing in 
 behalf of her patients, more sternly self-denying, 
 more Christ-like, and even happier 
 than she had ever been before.
When she returned to Walsall, a new 
 hospital bearing her name was opened 
 by the Mayor, but she was too ill to be 
 present. The townspeople refused to believe 
 that their "dear lady" was ill, and 
 when at last they were convinced that 
 she could not recover, everyone was grief-stricken.
In every church, twice on Sundays and 
 at the Wednesday night prayer-meeting, 
 public prayers were offered for Sister Dora's 
 restoration to health. In October, 1878, 
 she wrote to a friend: "The decree has 
  gone forth, 'Sister, put thy house in order, 
 for thou shalt die, and not live.' There 
 is only Mount Calvary to climb, by the 
 ladder of sickness. I have not had two 
 hours' sleep for four days and nights, but 
 in the midst of the fiery furnace there was a 
 form like unto the Son of God."
Eleven weeks of anguish followed, which 
 she bore heroically, until the end came, on 
 Christmas Eve. "I see Him there," she 
 said; "the gates are opened wide." And 
 through the open gates she went, free at 
 last of all disease and pain, perhaps to 
 find the poor little burned child of so many 
 years ago, who had promised to wait at 
 the gate for her "with a bouquet of 
 flowers."
It was a sad Christmas Day for Walsall, 
 and no celebrations were held. In some 
 cases, even the presents intended for the 
 children were put away, sadly, by weeping 
 men and women. The whole city, worshipping 
  her while living, paid honour to 
 her when she was dead.
Eight years afterward, in the midst of the 
 smoke and dirt of the central part of Walsall, 
 was erected a noble statue, of purest 
 marble—a likeness of Sister Dora when she 
 was young and beautiful, strong, and 
 happy in her chosen work. In her last 
 days she said once that she wished she 
 had married, but otherwise she voiced no 
 regret, even for her intense bodily pain. 
 "Say of me," she said, "only this—she 
 hath done what she could!"
