dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Wise_Some Remarkable Women  
University of Virginia Library
    
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
Sister Dora.
"Come, child of misfortune! come hither; 
 I'll weep with thee, tear for tear."
—Moore.
"But then, you see, she was a real princess."
Who was Sister Dora?
Sister Dora was the daughter of the Rev. 
 Mark Pattison, rector of Hauxwell, Yorkshire, 
 England. Her name was 
Dorothy WyndLow 
 Pattison;
 but when she joined a Protestant 
 sisterhood, who called themselves "Good Samaritans," 
 because they devoted their lives to various 
 works of mercy, she became known as Sister Dora. 
 I will introduce Miss Pattison to the reader as she 
 appeared in the year 1852, at which date she was 
 twenty years of age.
As described by her biographer,* 
* 
"Sister Dora: a Biography," by Margaret Lonsdale.
 she was then 
  a young lady of remarkable personal beauty. Her 
 splendid figure was tall, slender, and uncommonly 
 graceful. Her features were nearly perfect in their 
 regularity. Her unusually high and wide forehead 
 indicated the possession of superior mental qualities. 
 Her mouth was small when its full, red lips 
 were closed, but quite wide when she spoke or 
 laughed, and in its corners there lay a half-concealed 
 expression of fun. Her brilliant dark-brown eyes 
 twinkled in "merry sympathy" with her lips. Her 
 head was covered with "dark, tightly curling, brown 
 hair." To these attractions she added a delicate 
 and beautiful complexion, and she was, says Miss 
 Lonsdale, "a fascinating creature to look upon." 
 Her courteous manners and gentle speech harmonized 
 with her beauty, and made her beloved by her 
 friends and popular with all classes in the neighborhood 
 of her home. By many she was often 
 described as "a real princess," because of her sweetness 
 and dignity.
Such was Miss Dorothy Pattison at twenty. Her 
 life up to this period had been spent in her father's 
 rectory, under external conditions every way favorable 
 to the right formation of her character. Hauxwell 
 itself was a small, "intensely quiet" village of 
 only three hundred inhabitants, situated on the 
  border of extensive moorlands. But the rectory 
 was alive with the stir of twelve children, of whom 
 Dorothy was the youngest but one. She was very 
 delicate when a child, and because of this and of 
 her sweet and even temper, she became "the pet 
 and darling of her elder sisters." But though petted 
 and kept from regular study because of her physical 
 debility, she was neither spoiled in disposition 
 nor dwarfed in mind. She learned as by instinct, 
 and through a habit of minute observation unconsciously 
 formed. What she learned she remembered. 
 If not always a correct, she was yet a precocious 
 reasoner. Her will was strong as iron, but her 
 unselfishness and her desire to please kept her from 
 being willful and obstinate. Instead of meeting 
 opposition to her wishes with sulkiness and ill-temper, 
 she resorted to shrewd but good-natured 
 devices to accomplish her purposes. These devices, 
 though often, perhaps generally, successful, were 
 sometimes blameworthy, and brought her into conflict 
 with the firm discipline of her judicious parents, 
 to whose corrections she submitted, if not with absolute 
 cheerfulness, yet with filial respect.
When fourteen years old Dorothy suffered 
 through several months from painful and dangerous 
 illness. She bore the pain with singular fortitude; 
  she endured the weariness of slow recovery cheerfully, 
 by constantly looking on the bright side of 
 her case. Thus her sick-chamber was made a school 
 of discipline, in which the best traits of her character 
 were strengthened.
Dorothy's parents were much given to deeds of 
 charity. They trained their children to habits of 
 economy and self-denial, not for the purpose of saving 
 money, but that, by saving and self-denial, they 
 might have more to give to the poor. Dorothy 
 entered into their benevolent spirit quite readily, 
 yet showed as yet no specially warm devotion to 
 charitable work.
After recovering from her long illness, she took 
 to riding much on horseback, and became a good, 
 even a daring, horsewoman. She learned to follow 
 the hounds with her brothers, and to ride across the 
 wild moorlands with a dashing speed, which fairly fascinated 
 the Yorkshire lads who witnessed her feats 
 of courage and independence. Thus, by much riding, 
 and by running, jumping, and other active outdoor 
 games, she at length became a strong, healthy, 
 energetic woman. She was gifted with a flow of 
 animal spirits which seemed unbounded, and with a 
 power of perceiving and enjoying the humorous 
 side of things. These gifts made her the "bright 
  bonnie maiden" of the rectory, constantly bubbling 
 over with harmless fun. She was, withal, thoughtful, 
 given to meditation, to reflection, and to the 
 silent gathering-up of such facts and principles as 
 were the topics of conversation around the rectory 
 fireside, where culture and religion presided in 
 delightful harmony, making the atmosphere of her 
 home peaceful and every way enjoyable—an absolute 
 contrast to that other Yorkshire rectory in which 
 the gifted Bronté sisters passed their lives.
The activity of Miss Dorothy's nature, and the 
 monotony of life in a wild moorland region, begot 
 a restlessness in her spirit which was extremely 
 painful, and hard to be endured. This feeling was 
 highly stimulated when reports of Florence Nightingale's 
 noble work in the Crimean hospitals reached 
 her. "Let me go to her and be one of her nurses!" 
 she said to her father. "No, my daughter," the 
 good rector wisely replied, "you have had no training 
 for such work. You would be worse than useless 
 to Miss Nightingale. Besides, there is work 
 enough for you here, if you would only think so."
She submitted to her father's decision with filial 
 respect; albeit her craving for a more active life 
 grew inwardly stronger. This inward tempest she 
 so far concealed, however, as still to be the sunshine 
  of her home, and to share with one of her sisters 
 the duty of tenderly nursing her now invalid mother. 
 It was a pleasing relief to her to visit her elder 
 brother during his vacations, because from her conversations 
 with him she reaped much intellectual 
 quickening. During one of those visits she had a 
 singular dream, in which she saw her mother drawing 
 aside the curtains of her bed, and heard her 
 calling, "Dora, Dora, Dora!" This dream was 
 repeated the following night. The next day a letter 
 informed her of her mother's dangerous sickness. 
 She hastened home and found her mother sick 
 unto death!
It is perhaps impossible to explain the philosophy 
 of this remarkable dream. But the effect of 
 her mother's death on Dora's life is easily comprehended. 
 Her mother's departure left her with 
 slight domestic occupation, and thereby gave her 
 restlessness such full play that her home-life, loving, 
 elevating, and peaceful though it was, became absolutely 
 distastcful to her. She had heard of the 
 Sisterhood of Good Samaritans, and now asked her 
 father's permission to join them. He strongly 
 objected, though he did not absolutely forbid her 
 doing so, since he very properly recognized her liberty 
 to decide freely for herself, seeing that she was 
  now nearly thirty years of age. She so far respected 
 his wishes as not to join the Sisters at that time, but 
 she did display her self-will to the extent of leaving 
 the home of her childhood and becoming a schoolmistress 
 in the village of Woolston. In this she 
 did "very wrong," as she confessed years after on 
 her death-bed; because instead of biding the opening 
 of a providential path, she made a road for 
 herself out of her proper place into a position which 
 was much below her capabilities, her habits, and 
 early associations. Instead of waiting for Providence 
 to open a door for her entrance to the world 
 beyond her home, she forced an opening with her 
 own hands.
She spent three years in the Woolston School, 
 giving herself wholly to her chosen work. These 
 years, though marked by privations, humiliations, 
 and hardships, were far from being wasted. Her 
 pupils loved her, and profited by her skillful teaching; 
 the people of the place also recognized her as a 
 lady—"a real princess," the working classes called 
 her. One wealthy old gentleman and his wife were 
 so charmed with her, that they begged her to give 
 up her school and live with them. As they had no 
 children, the old gentleman offered to make her his 
 heir. This offer Dora declined. It was not case, 
  but active work, that she craved. And this craving 
 grew so morbid that to her teaching by day she 
 added nursing the sick by night. She was constantly 
 haunted by an impression that she was not 
 doing enough. Driven by this unnatural spur, she 
 so overtaxed her vigorous physical powers, that 
 she was at length stricken with pleurisy, and taken 
 to the Home of the Good Samaritans at Redcar, 
 to be nursed. There she recovered her health, but 
 did not rid herself of her morbid feelings, which 
 were rather intensified than diminished by intercourse 
 with the Sisterhood. Hence, in the Autumn of 
 1864, very much to the regret of all her family, 
 she became a member of the order of Good Samaritans.
This Sisterhood, unlike those of the Papal 
 Church, and of some of the High Church of England 
 orders, took no vows, excepting a pledge of 
 obedience to the clergyman whom they recognized 
 as their pastor, and to the Sister whom he might 
 appoint from their number to fill the office of 
 "Sister in charge," or "Mother Superior." Their 
 work was not contemplative, but secular and active, 
 consisting chiefly in nursing the sick, both in hospitals 
 and in private dwellings. As to the Sisters 
 composing it, they appear to have been mostly 
  uncultivated women, without much special intellectual 
 training, and in every way inferior to Miss Pattison, 
 who, as we have seen, was a lady by birth, habit, 
 associations, and manners. In every thing but the 
 charitable nature of the work to be done, her 
 entrance among them was a descent from her proper 
 social position. Even her motive, at that particular 
 period of her life, did not much ennoble her 
 act; for just then she was simply seeking to stifle 
 the doubts she had latterly entertained concerning 
 the truth of historical Christianity, by the mental 
 preoccupation involved in toiling to excess in the 
 sick-rooms of the poor. We shall see, by and by, 
 how this motive was subsequently replaced by one 
 which lifted her life up to the highest plane of 
 moral grandeur and Christian nobleness.
These well-meaning but somewhat misjudging 
 Sisters subjected Dora to very severe discipline. 
 She was a neophyte, and they thought she must 
 be taught implicit obedience to their authority. 
 Hence they gave her such servile and, to her, distasteful 
 tasks as making beds, sweeping and scrubbing 
 floors, scouring grates, and cooking in the 
 kitchen of their "Home."
Not very pleasant tasks, truly, for a highly 
 bred lady, nor such as she had expected; yet, when 
  speaking of this training in after years, she said, 
 "It was good for me." Assuredly it must have 
 tended to humble her pride, and subdue her 
 strongly-developed self-will.
This initiatory training was succeeded by her 
 introduction to hospital work, which was better 
 suited to her taste and purposes. The year after 
 she joined the Sisters, she was sent to a hospital 
 containing fourteen beds, in the populous town of 
 Walsall. Scarcely had she begun her appointed 
 task there, before she caught the small-pox from 
 an out-patient. She was very sick, and very poorly 
 cared for by her "Sister" nurses. Nevertheless, 
 she recovered, and resumed her duties.
Walsall was a coal and iron town. Its people 
 mostly wrought in the mines and at the furnaces. 
 Ignorance and vice largely prevailed among them. 
 In Mr. Wesley's day they were given to riot and 
 cruelty, and seem to have retained their disposition 
 to violence to modern times. By some means an 
 impression was made that the "Good Samaritans" 
 were papists, and they proposed to treat them as 
 they had treated the Methodists a century before. 
 A mob stoned their hospital; and one evening Sister 
 Dora, returning from a visit to an out-patient, 
 was struck in the forehead by a stone from the 
  hand of a lad, who shouted, "There goes one of 
 the sisters of misery!"
Not long after, this violent lad was severely 
 injured in a coal-pit. On being taken to the hospital, 
 he was at once recognized by Dora, and she 
 nursed him with special care. One day during his 
 convalescence, he sobbed, and said:
"Sister, I threw that stone at you."
"O," she replied, "did you think I did not know 
 that? Why, I knew you the very first minute you 
 came in at the door."
"What!" he rejoined, "you knew me, and yet 
 have been nursing me like this?"
This was the first practical experience of good 
 returned for evil that young man had ever received, 
 and it filled him with wonder, and with admiration 
 of Sister Dora.
The superiority of Sister Dora to the other 
 members of the Sisterhood was soon obvious to all 
 who had the opportunity of seeing them. When 
 Sir James Simpson, of Edinburgh, visited their 
 Home in search of a suitable nurse, to take care 
 of a partially insane old lady, after seeing all the 
 others, he was introduced to Dora. She was busy, 
 with her sleeves tucked up, making a pudding. But 
 his experienced eye, despite her employment, saw 
  in her a character that was lacking in all her companions, 
 and he promptly said: "Send me that 
 sister. She is the one for my case."
The event proved that Sir James was not mistaken. 
 Dora managed the half-mad old lady with 
 a degree of skill and tact that soothed her violent 
 moods, and she actually won her affections. In 
 speaking of this service subsequently, Sister Dora 
 said: "I had an uncommonly unpleasant time with 
 that mad old lady."
The cold-hearted tyranny of the probably jealous 
 Sisterhood was shown when Sister Dora, in obedience 
 to their order, was preparing to go to Devonshire, 
 to nurse a private patient. Just then a letter 
 informed her that her father was dangerously sick, 
 and desired to see her. She begged permission to 
 visit him. But her stern Superior replied, "No; 
 you must go at once to Devonshire!"
With an aching heart Sister Dora unwisely sacrificed 
 her filial obligations on the altar of obedience 
 to the Sisterhood. She had scarcely reached her 
 patient's home before she was informed that her 
 father was dead. Then the Sisterhood, ashamed, 
 probably, of their tyranny, or else afraid of public 
 censure, wrote her: "You may attend your father's 
 funeral, if you please."
  
With pardonable bitterness, Dora replied: 
 "When my father was alive, you would not permit 
 me to go to him. Now he is dead, I no longer 
 care to go."
Sister Dora ought not to have yielded to the 
 cold-hearted tyranny of those so-called Good Samaritans, 
 whose zeal for their order had evidently 
 chilled their finer affections. But in this they only 
 illustrated the tendency of all those organizations, 
 whether male or female, Catholic or Protestant, 
 which require implicit submission to official authority. 
 No human being has a right to make such a 
 surrender of personal freedom to the will of others. 
 The effect of this tyranny on Sister Dora was to 
 weaken her respect for the Sisterhood; and but for 
 the fixedness of her desire to lighten the burdens 
 of the afflicted, she would probably have quitted 
 them at once. Nevertheless, seeing that through 
 them she could best find opportunities to gratify 
 her desire, she, though sore at heart, retained her 
 connection with them a little longer.
She was sorely tempted, too, about this time, to 
 quit the sisters, by an eligible offer of marriage. 
 Her affection for her suitor, though sufficiently deep 
 to produce a severe conflict in her mind with her 
 cherished purpose to devote her life to works of 
  mercy, was yet not strong enough to overcome it. 
 Marriage and maternity had unusually strong attractions 
 for her affectionate nature, and when reviewing 
 her life, near its close, she said, "If I had to begin 
 life over again I would marry." But the candidate 
 for her hand failed to awaken in her a love strong 
 enough to overcome the passion for a life devoted 
 to active usefulness among the suffering. Had he 
 sought her earlier, while her nursing was as yet only 
 a means of calming somewhat the restlessness of her 
 mind caused by her nascent skepticism, it is likely 
 that she would have become his wife. But by this 
 time her doubts had found their solution in a personal 
 love for Christ. Hence, her motive in nursing 
 was no longer simply a desire to escape unrest, but 
 a noble purpose to serve suffering humanity for the 
 sake of Him who died for her and for the whole 
 world. And but for the counsels of judicious friends, 
 she would most likely at this time have joined one 
 of those High Church Sisterhoods which are bound 
 by vows to lead a single life. As it was, her conflict 
 ended in the rejection of this suitor and her continuance, 
 with renewed zeal, in the work she had 
 chosen, especially in her hospital work at Walsall.
The Walsall mines and iron works, in which 
 accidents to their workers were common occurrences, 
  created a constant demand for surgical skill in the 
 hospital. Sister Dora perceived this at once, and 
 gave the full power of her penetrative mind to such 
 close observation of the surgical work done by its 
 medical attendants as to acquire a quick and "keen 
 discernment of the character of wounds and of the 
 exact position of fractures." Her courage, self-possession, 
 and tactual skill soon so won the confidence 
 and admiration of the old doctor of the hospital 
 that he gladly gave her all the instruction in his 
 power. The result was that she became a skillful 
 surgeon as well as a nurse, whose tenderness, patience, 
 activity, endurance, and power to inspire the suffering 
 with hopeful courage, could not be excelled. 
 For a time she did her work so unobtrusively as 
 not to attract much attention outside of the hospital 
 and of the homes of the out-door patients. But 
 having contracted a serious sickness in 1866 by her 
 utter and unpardonable disregard of her own health, 
 the general public began to hear of her good deeds 
 through the reports of those to whom she had rendered 
 valuable services. Then many asked, "Who 
 is this Sister Dora of whom we hear so much?" 
 The replies they got led not a few to seek her 
 acquaintance.
Among these was a clergyman of the National 
  Church, named Richard Twigg, a truly evangelical 
 man, whose instructions and friendship proved unspeakably 
 valuable to her. Indeed, she ascribed her 
 recovery mainly to the prayers of this devout minister, 
 and of his large congregation, whom he had 
 interested in her behalf.
The demands of the growing population of Walsall 
 on the hospital led to the erection of a larger 
 structure in a more healthful situation, over which 
 Sister Dora was duly installed in 1868. Just then 
 the small-pox became epidemic in the town. Nothing 
 daunted by the disgusting and infectious character 
 of this loathsome disease, she labored day and 
 night, in and out of the hospital, for several months.
 (Her excessive labors, her neglect of her own needs 
 of sleep and food, were truly marvelous during the 
 prevalence of this epidemic, and excited general 
 admiration.
One night she was sent for by a poor man who 
 was dying of the worst type of this disease. She 
 found him forsaken by all his relations. Only a 
 neighbor was left to watch him. Finding only a 
 small piece of candle in the house, she gave this 
 woman money to procure more candles, promising 
 to stay with the sufferer until her return. But the 
 woman spent the money for drink, and did not 
  reappear with the needed candles. Sister Dora continued 
 by the poor creature's bedside. Presently 
 he raised himself up in his bed as far as his departing 
 strength permitted and said: "Sister, kiss me 
 before I die!" It was a loathsome task, but Dora, 
 thinking more of the poor man's feelings than of 
 herself, put her arms around him and kissed him! 
 The next moment the candle went out. "Do n't 
 leave me, Sister, while I live," groaned the dying 
 man. It was then past midnight, but she remained 
 beside him until he died. Even then she kept 
 dreary watch in the darkness, fearing that, though 
 silent and cold, the poor creature might still be 
 alive. When the day dawned she groped her way 
 to the door and called in the neighbors. Surely 
 she was a ministering angel to that deserted man!)
The tenderness of Dora's nature moved her to 
 closely study "what is called conservative surgery." 
 The doctors of the hospital, when they saw a bruised 
 and mangled limb, were but too apt to decide, without 
 much hesitation, on its amputation. Dora, knowing 
 that the loss of limb by a miner or iron-founder 
 meant future poverty both for the man and his family, 
 always urged the surgeons to save the limb if 
 at all possible. Here is a typical case of her action 
 in this direction: A fine, healthy young man was 
  brought to the hospital one night with an arm 
 badly crushed by a machine. The doctor said, 
 peremptorily:
"Nothing can save that arm ! It must be cut 
 off at once."
The man groaned deeply. Sister Dora's sympathies 
 were moved. She scanned the mangled limb 
 with a critical eye, and thought it could be saved. 
 The young man, as if reading her thoughts, cried 
 piteously:
"O, Sister ! save my arm for me; it's my 
 right arm.
Turning to the surgeon, Dora said, "I believe 
 I can save this arm if you will let me try."
"Are you mad?" retorted the doctor, angrily. 
 "I tell you it's an impossibility. Mortification will 
 soon set in. Nothing but amputation can save 
 his life."
Dora, turning to the sufferer, asked: "Are you 
 willing I should try to save your arm, my man?" 
The man joyfully consented to accept the risk. 
 The doctor was now in as much passion as he could 
 be with this wonderful woman, whom he greatly 
 admired, and walked away, saying: "Well, mind, 
 it's your arm ! If you choose to have the young 
 man's death on your conscience, I shall not interfere. 
  I wash my hands of him. Do n't think I am going 
 to help you."
Dora had often disagreed with the doctor, and 
 results had usually justified her opinion. In this 
 case she used her utmost skill during the ensuing 
 three weeks. Then she said to the doctor, "Come 
 and see my work!"
Scarcely willing to be proved wrong by a woman 
 who was under his personal direction, he somewhat 
 sullenly complied. Dora removed the bandages, 
 and showed him the arm, no longer mangled, but 
 straight and healthy. Astonished at this unexpected 
 sight, he exclaimed: "Why, you have saved 
 it! It will be useful to him for many a long year." 
 Then calling in the rest of his medical staff, he 
 proudly bade them look at the work of his pupil, 
 and learn from it "what might be done."
Dora was gratified. She loved approbation, 
 especially when she knew it to be deserved. More 
 precious, however, to her was the young man's 
 gratitude, and the influence this and other feats of 
 nursing skill gave her, not only with her medical 
 superior, but also with the trustees of the hospital. 
 By their permission, she now undertook to take 
 lady pupils, to train in the hospital as surgical 
 nurses. This work did not, probably, add as much 
  to her burdens as to her responsibilities, because 
 the lady pupils, while under her instruction, by 
 acting as nurses and assistants, relieved her of other 
 portions of her too heavy duties.
Sister Dora had large intellectual capacities 
 which, despite her constant preoccupation, craved 
 sympathy with some kindred spirit. Her patients 
 mostly belonged to the uncultivated classes; her 
 lady pupils were not sufficiently long with her—
 were not, perhaps, of an intellectual standard high 
 enough to satisfy her craving; her pastor, though 
 very helpful to the religious side of her life, could 
 not, with the many claims upon his time, minister 
 to her mental wants; and she was too fully occupied 
 to find what she needed in the best social 
 circles of Walsall. This sense of intellectual isolation 
 prepared her to fall into a snare, which came 
 very near working a complete, perhaps an unhappy, 
 change in her career. This snare was no other 
 than a new suitor for her hand. A gentleman intellectually 
 her superior, fitted in all but one feature 
 of his character to meet the demands of both her 
 mind and heart, became strongly attached to her, 
 and offered to make her his wife. Dora reciprocated 
 his affection with all the ardor of her sympathetic 
 nature. Her love became a passion. She 
  engaged herself to him, and was on the point of 
 exchanging her chosen vocation for the more attractive 
 duties of married life.
This was very natural, and not in itself improper. 
 Nay, it was in many ways desirable. But 
 the friend whose counsels had kept her from giving 
 her hand to a previous suitor, ventured to protest 
 against her present passion. ("Your affianced," he 
 pleaded, "is a pronounced skeptic. You are bound 
 to your God by the ties of faith and love. Can 
 you retain your faith if you become the wife of an 
 infidel? If you can, will not your differences on 
 this most momentous of all subjects, breed discord 
 between you?
Dora pondered these weighty questions until, 
 convinced that her love to Christ was infinitely 
 more important, both to her personal happiness 
 and to her influence over others, than her passionate 
 love for this cultivated infidel, she withdrew 
 from her engagement. This was a great, a 
 really noble sacrifice. It cost her a mental struggle 
 so intensely agonizing that it made her the 
 prey of a fit of sickness which lasted a month, and 
 brought her to the very door of death. At least, 
 the good old hospital doctor thought she was near 
 her end when he left the institution one day, saying, 
  with tears, "If Sister Dora dies, I'll never enter 
 these doors again!"
But Sister Dora did not die. Her strong will, 
 with skillful treatment, and the blessing of God, 
 restored her to health, and to the work she loved.)
Were it not authentically vouched, the story of 
 Sister Dora's work, both in and out of the hospital, 
 would be deemed incredible. Her capacity of 
 working incessantly all day, and of watching four 
 or five nights in succession, was such as few, either 
 men or women, possess. Her ability as a tender 
 nurse, her surgical skill in reducing a fracture, 
 tying an artery, and dressing a wound, is rarely 
 excelled, even by professional surgeons. Her versatility, 
 by which she could turn from managing 
 the sick wards to directing the catering departments 
 of the establishment, was remarkable; her 
 power to command the respect of the rude, often 
 vile, men who were constantly placed under her 
 care, was such as few men or women possess; and 
 the magnetism by which she inspired her patients 
 with fortitude under terrible surgical operations, 
 or when their wounds, caused by burning and scalding, 
 were dressed, and with cheerfulness under the 
 weariness of long-continued weakness and pain, was 
 also wonderful. But besides all these qualities, and 
  the burden of her onerous hospital duties, she engaged 
 after 1873 in missionary work. She had 
 previously regarded her nursing as a ministration 
 to Christ's sick and suffering ones, and had constantly 
 prayed for his blessing on her nursing. 
 But when, in 1873, a special meeting was held in 
 Walsall for the spiritual welfare of the people, she 
 went out among them, and persuaded many to 
 attend the services. She also attended prayer-meetings 
 established by her pastor, the liberal-minded 
 Mr. Twigg; and after going to Birmingham, for 
 the purpose of studying the methods of Moody and 
 Sankey, she taught her hospital patients to sing 
 the Sankey hymns; and at the close of the Sunday 
 afternoon hospital services, conducted by a clergyman, 
 she addressed them in her own peculiar and 
 effective manner., "I try to put myself," she said, 
 "in the place of these poor men, to see with their 
 eyes, and to feel their wants and difficulties as if 
 they were my own, and then God puts into my 
 heart the words which will reach their hearts." Is 
 it surprising that by this simple process, and by her 
 habits of constant Bible study, she became wise to 
 win souls? She always carried a small Bible in her 
 pocket, and when found reading it one day by one 
 of her lady pupils, "the expression on her face," 
  said this eye-witness, "was indescribable; it was 
 like nothing I had ever seen on a human face before—unearthly 
 is the word I must use for it." 
 Evidently Sister Dora had learned to see the face 
 and heart of her Lord in his Word. To her, reading 
 the Bible was communing with God.
In 1874 Sister Dora dissolved her connection 
 with the "Good Samaritans," saying, when asked 
 her reason for this act, "I am a woman, and not 
 a piece of furniture!" The Sisterhood then 
 wrote the committee that they would no longer be 
 responsible for the nursing at the Walsall hospital. 
 But the committee, esteeming Sister Dora's services 
 as of higher value to them than those of the whole 
 Sisterhood, requested her to assume its entire charge, 
 to which she gladly assented, seeing that it was only 
 formally accepting a responsibility which she had 
 practically borne for several years.
Perhaps Dora's crowning act of self-denial was 
 her offer, in 1875, to take charge of the Epidemic 
 Hospital, which had been built after the visitation 
 of small-pox suffered by the Walsall people in 1868. 
 Dora knew that the poor would not send their sick 
 to such a hospital if conducted by ordinary nurses. 
 She knew, too, as did the authorities of the city, 
 that if she took it in charge they would willingly 
  trust their friends to her care. It was a daring, a 
 revolting, a perilous task to isolate herself from the 
 community, and to shut herself up with small-pox 
 patients, for an indefinite time. It was too much to 
 ask her to do it, for was it not going into the jaws 
 of death? But, seeing that she might thereby prevent 
 the town from being ravaged by this disgusting 
 and deadly pestilence, and so save many lives, 
 she did not wait to be asked; but, after finding 
 that she could safely trust her own hospital to the care 
 of three lady pupils, she heroically volunteered to 
 undertake it. Her offer was gladly accepted. The 
 public breathed more freely, as men and women 
 went about saying to one another, "Sister Dora 
 is going to the Epidemic Hospital!" O, Christlike 
 Sister Dora!
It is a pity that this Christly act was marred by 
 Dora's jealousy lest, during her absence from her 
 post, some one of her lady pupils should display 
 qualities that might rival her own. To prevent 
 this, instead of placing one of them in charge, she 
 left, simply bidding them divide its duties among 
 themselves. The result, as she must have anticipated, 
 was disagreement and inefficiency. The pride 
 she took in her acknowledged superiority as a nurse 
 was the root of her jealousy. It was a spot on the 
  otherwise grand decision of Dora's love for humanity 
 and Christ, which led her to immure herself 
 within the walls of the Epidemic Hospital. Alas, 
 poor human nature!
When Dora stood on the steps of the Epidemic 
 Hospital, a great dread of what she was to encounter 
 there filled her heart. Shivering with a strange 
 spasm of terror, she exclaimed:
"O, take me back! I can not endure this 
 dreadful place! I had no idea what it would be 
 like when I said I would come here."
Her companion, the physician of the hospital, 
 only replied, "Come in!" She followed him. The 
 internal arrangements of the building at once 
 arrested her attention. Her momentary fear vanished, 
 and she went quietly to her work.
Dora spent six months in that dreadful lazar-house, 
 among the victims of the repulsive epidemic, 
 with no one to assist her except an old porter and 
 some poor women employed to do the washing of 
 the patients. The toil she endured, the scenes she 
 witnessed, the courage she displayed, the skill with 
 which she fought the disease, the cheerfulness with 
 which she encouraged the sufferers, and the wonderful 
 fortitude which kept her at her post, can 
 neither be described nor even imagined. Nevertheless, 
  sustained by her indomitable will, and by 
 the grace of the Lord Jesus, she lived to see the 
 last small-pox patient pass out from her care, to see 
 the gates of the building closed, and to resume her 
 old place in the regular hospital.
The limits of this sketch forbid further details 
 of the work of this really wonderful woman. (It 
 must, therefore, suffice to add that she continued 
 her career as nurse and Christian worker, chiefly at 
 Walsall, with unabated zeal and self-devotion, winning, 
 as usual, the affections of even her rudest and 
 vilest patients, until, in 1877, she began to feel her 
 masculine strength slightly deelining. "What can 
 be the cause?" she asked herself. Unable to answer 
 this question, she consulted Mr. Crompton, a physician 
 who was her personal friend. The result of his 
 examination was startling. It brought her face to 
 face with death; for, as he assured her, she had a 
 cancer which, said he, "must ultimately destroy 
 your life!"
Mr. Crompton proposed a surgical operation. 
 "It may prolong your life somewhat," he said. But 
 Dora hesitated. She knew the uncertainty of the 
 treatment proposed. Finally she said:
"No, I will allow the disease to take its natural 
 course. But promise me to keep my condition a 
  secret. If my friends find it out, they will not permit 
 me to keep on working, as I wish to do to 
 the last."
Dr. Crompton gave the required promise, and 
 Dora returned to her duties, knowing that her 
 death-sentence was written on her person. She 
 then prayerfully reviewed her past life, and saw in 
 it, as she thought, so much work left undone, so 
 many wasted opportunities, so much time unredeemed, 
 that she resolved to give all the financial 
 resources she had inherited from her father, with 
 the whole energy of her soul and body, to make the 
 very utmost of every moment still left her.) Besides 
 this motive for keeping her disease a secret, she 
 shrunk from being an object of pity. She, who 
 could pity others and give them her overflowing 
 sympathy, could not endure to be herself pitied. 
 Perhaps there was a little pride in this shrinking 
 from pity and sympathy, or it may be she was content 
 with the sympathy of Him in whose steps she 
 was so treading, that common opinion was voiced 
 by one of her friends, who said, after her death, 
 "Sister Dora was as like the Lord Jesus as any 
 human creature could be."
Dora visited the Isle of Man in the Summer of 
 1878, to see some of her nieces. She then went to 
  Paris to the Exhibition, and afterwards to London, 
 at both of which places she gave close attention to 
 medical and surgical questions. In appearance she 
 was still a beautiful, healthful lady; in reality she 
 was slowly approaching the crisis of her disease. In 
 October she wrote to a clerical friend: "The decree 
 has gone forth, 'Sister, put thy house in order, for 
 thou shalt die, and not live.' There is only Mount 
 Calvary to climb, by the ladder of sickness. I have 
 not had two hours' sleep for four days and nights; 
 but in the midst of the fiery furnace there was a 
 form like unto the Son of God."
Then came eleven weeks of exquisite suffering, 
 during which she was lovingly nursed by her Walsall 
 friends, and visited by many leading citizens 
 of the place. On the 24th of December, replying 
 to a friend who had remarked, "Our blessed Lord 
 is standing at the gates of heaven to open them for 
 you," she said: "I see him there; the gates are 
 opened wide."
A little later her pain subsided, and Sister Dora's 
 life ebbed quietly away, and her escaped spirit 
 swelled the glorified throng, and was forever with 
 her Lord.
Dora's death filled all Walsall with genuine 
 grief. The whole city was deeply moved, and 
  almost its entire population, from its civic officers 
 to its poor, its halt, and its maimed, was present at 
 her burial. Never did any city pay greater honor 
 to one of its dead than Walsall to the remains of 
 Sister Dora.
There was much in Sister Dora's life that can 
 not be, perhaps ought not to be, imitated by any 
 other woman. Her idiosyncrasies were peculiarly 
 her own. What woman ever combined so much 
 masculine physical strength with so much feminine 
 grace and beauty? or so much manly force of 
 character with so much womanly delicacy? or so 
 much broad, not to say coarse, humor with so much 
 purity of feeling and language? or so much self-forgetfulness 
 in the presence of the many inevitable 
 indelicacies of hospital practice with so much perfect 
 modesty? It is not her idiosyncrasies, therefore, 
 that the Christian woman is to aspire to imitate, 
 but only her spirit of self-sacrifice. Dora gave all 
 she had to the service of Christ and humanity. My 
 lady reader can give all she has to the same high 
 service. Dora spent herself in a way suited to her 
 peculiar endowments. The lady reader can spend 
 her life in a way suited to her own gifts. The voice 
 of duty does not call any lady, young or old, to 
 tread paths which nature has unfitted her to walk 
  in, but only to consecrate whatever gifts she has to 
 the Master's service. When our dear Lord gave 
 judgment concerning Mary's devotion, he did not 
 say, She hath done what Deborah or Elizabeth or 
 Salome did, but, "She hath done what she could." 
 And this is duty's call to every daughter of the 
 Church—so to act that, at her death, the Eternal 
 Judge may say of her, "She hath done what 
 she could."
