dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Chappell_Four Noble Women  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
SISTER DORA.
  
Sister Dora.
"A perfect woman, nobly planned, 
 To warn, to comfort, and command."
  
CHAPTER I.
"LITTLE SUNSHINE."
In the Yorkshire village of Hauxwell, near Richmond, 
 there lived, half-a-century ago, a good 
 clergyman and his wife, named Pattison, and 
 their large family of twelve children. The eldest and 
 youngest of these were sons, and all the rest daughters.
The youngest of the ten girls was little Dorothy, 
 or Dora, as she was commonly called, a winsome 
 creature, gifted with extreme beauty, a merry spirit, 
 and sweetness of temper, that made her the pet and 
 darling of her older sisters; whose tenderness and 
 care were frequently called into requisition by the 
 attacks of illness to which Dora was subject during 
 the whole of her childish days.
The Pattison family were noted for kindness and 
 benevolence to their poorer neighbours. Although 
 rich enough to have bestowed charity with ordinary 
 freedom whenever it was needed, we are told that 
  "the girls were always planning how to save their 
 money to give it away, and they made a rule of 
 carefully mending and re-making their old clothes, 
 in order that they might not have to buy new ones." 
 Also, they thought nothing of giving away their 
 dinners and faring on bread-and-cheese themselves. 
 "In fact," to quote again from Dora's biographer, 
 "giving to others instead of spending on themselves, 
 seems to have been the rule and delight of their lives; 
 for not only did they liberally bestow money, but 
 time, instruction, powers of mind and body, and above 
 all, love and pity to those around them."
In such an atmosphere as this, was reared the fine 
 nature of the little girl who was by-and-by to be 
 enshrined in the hearts of thousands of her poor and 
 suffering fellow-creatures as "Sister Dora."
Like all who leave an impress upon the world, 
 Dorothy Pattison was possessed of a very decided 
 "will of her own." She loved to have her own way; 
 not so much because it was her way, still less because 
 it was in opposition to other people's way, but because 
 she felt so strongly convinced that it was the best 
 way. And we are bound to admit, so quick was her 
 insight, and so true her judgment that, in after years, 
 at least, she was generally right.
Not always, of course, and certainly not in her 
 early days; as may be shown by a rather amusing 
 anecdote, which also well illustrates the young lady's 
 readiness of resource and that ingenuity in compassing 
 the desired end which made her so effectual 
 a power for good when her manifold gifts were consecrated 
 to the service of God.
Dora and the sister next in age to her, who was 
  her dearly-loved and constant companion, were provided 
 one winter with velvet bonnets which by no 
 means pleased their juvenile taste. Objections proved 
 of no avail, the bonnets were bought, and they must 
 be worn, unless—ah, here was the loop-hole of escape! 
 —unless something happened to damage them.
One day, it poured with rain; mother had gone 
 for a long drive, nurse and sisters were all conveniently 
 out of the way; Dora, brimming over with her 
 brilliant idea, ran to her sister. "Be quick; now's 
 our chance of spoiling our bonnets!"
On went the luckless bonnets, out at a window 
 poked two naughty little heads, until the hated velvet 
 was well soaked in the downpour of wet. Then, at 
 the suggestion of far-sighted Dora, who did not wish a 
 satisfactory hour's work to be undone by any remedial 
 measure, they were taken off and stowed quietly away 
 in their respective boxes all dripping as they were.
Sunday morning came, and the deplorable state of 
 the velvet bonnets was then calmly announced by the 
 chief culprit. "They are quite spoilt; we can never 
 wear them any more."
But alas! the "best-laid schemes of mice" and 
 naughty little girls, sometimes end in humiliating 
 failure. The bonnets were worn that Sunday and for 
 many Sundays after, so the plotters only succeeded in 
 getting themselves "out of the frying-pan into the fire."
More creditable as well as more successful was the 
 next instance we have on record of Dora's wilfulness. 
 When she was about twelve years old, the sister 
 mentioned above had a serious illness, and Dora, who 
 had always been very fond of tending, washing and 
 nursing her imaginary sick dollies, now begged and 
  entreated to be allowed to sit up with the dear 
 patient. This was at first firmly refused, but one 
 night the devoted little sister smuggled herself into 
 the room unobserved; when by-and-by discovered, she 
 was rewarded for her persistence by being allowed to 
 remain, and she helped to nurse her sister until the 
 latter was well again.
A year or two later, Dora's overflowing helpfulness 
 and disposition to carry out impulsively her own 
 desires, both got her into disgrace at home, and gave 
 her a singularly true foretaste of what she would have 
 to go through in after life.
Fever was rife in the village of Hauxwell, and Dora, 
 calling one day to inquire after an old woman who 
 was ill, found her very bad and with no one to do 
 anything for her. Immediately Dora, with no thought 
 of permission from home to be asked or received, 
 hung up her hat and cloak behind the door and 
 resolved to stay. She washed, tended, and read to 
 the poor woman, and when evening came she sent 
 word to her parents of where she was and her intention 
 to remain. Somewhat to her dismay the 
 answer was returned, "You went without our permission; 
 now stay where you are until you are sent for."
Notwithstanding the careful ministrations of the 
 devoted young nurse, her patient grew worse, and the 
 next night she died. A neighbour then came in and 
 helped, but by-and-by she was forced to go home, 
 and Dora was left alone with the body. It is characteristic 
 of the girl's pride and courage that she did not 
 run away, but waiting quietly until the morning, sent 
 the message to the rectory that the woman was dead, 
 and "Please, may I come home?"
  
But once more came the answer, "Stay where you 
 are until you are sent for."
This was, however, shortly followed by the appearance 
 of the family carriage, and in it the old nurse, 
 looking very stern and displeased. The sentence was 
 that Dora was to be banished to the sea-side, both as 
 a punishment and as a precaution against spreading 
 infection, before being allowed to mix with her relations.
At hearing this, the irrepressible girl began to 
 dance for joy, to the great scandalisation of nurse, 
 who reminded her that she was in dire disgrace. She 
 enjoyed a pleasant time, however, at the sea-side, 
 notwithstanding nurse's grave refusal to allow her to 
 invite to tea any of the children whose acquaintance 
 she made upon the sands. And on returning home, 
 in some trepidation, she was astonished to find herself 
 received with kisses and caresses, and praises for her 
 courage, until, as she said, "I was quite inflated, and 
 did not know what to make of it all."
Dora did not like study. She was excused, on 
 account of her frequent illnesses, from doing regular 
 lessons while she was little; and when feeling well 
 enough, she delighted in all sorts of out-of-door 
 sports, rioting about "just as wild, merry, and noisy 
 as a boy." Even as a child she possessed wonderful 
 patience and fortitude under suffering, her naturally 
 sweet temper and brave spirit being rarely disturbed 
 by her ill-health, while her love of fun and immense 
 capacity for seeing the humorous side of everything—
 a gift which brightened her life until its latest day—
 bubbled over continually. Her father gave her the 
 pet name of "Sunshine," and surely no more radiant 
 creature ever "made sunshine in the shady places" of 
  this dull old earth than did Sister Dora in the dark 
 spots where she chose to spend her life.
It has been thought by some that our heroine did 
 not, in her earliest days, show many signs of that 
 wonderful aptitude for tending the sick which afterwards 
 made her famous; but in addition to the illustrations 
 we have already given of her passionate love of 
 helping those in need, she herself told a friend that as a 
 child she used to say, "When I grow up, I'll be a nurse, 
 or a lady doctor, and do everything for my patients."
With this end in view, the little girl argued that it 
 was no use for her to learn music and languages; she 
 "didn't want to be a fine drawing-room lady." But 
 her teachers showed her that a nice Christian nurse 
 should learn everything she had time to learn. "How 
 could she be certain she would never have French or 
 German patients? and all like music."
This way of looking at the matter made Dora very 
 much more content. "And, dears,"she would say to 
 her young friends in after life, "there isn't a single 
 thing, nor an accomplishment, that has not in some 
 way been hallowed in this service for God. So never 
 you feel that it is waste of time to get knowledge of 
any 
 kind
; you can never tell how handy it may come in."
As Dora grew older and stronger, drawing in daily 
 the health-giving air of the open moors which surrounded 
 her home, she took great delight in all athletic 
 sports—shooting, rowing, swimming, archery, skating, 
 and even climbing trees, while, like all strong natures 
 with an aptitude to rule, she loved to control a horse, 
 and riding and driving were among her greatest joys. 
 That she was a good and daring horsewoman it is 
 unnecessary to say.
  
All these pursuits tended towards physical development 
 and strength. After a severe illness, when about 
 fourteen years of age, Dora's health took a decided 
 turn for the better, and during the next few years she 
 bloomed out into a fine and robust young woman. 
 At twenty years old she is described as "tall, strong, 
 and healthy,… vigorous both at work and play, 
 and with a restless energy which would not be satisfied 
 with inaction of body or mind for one single moment." 
 She, moreover, possessed regular features, brilliant 
 dark-brown eyes, wavy dark hair, a beautiful complexion, 
 and great vivacity of expression. If we add 
 to this an elegant figure, with the queenly height of 
 five feet seven inches, a clear, rich voice, and last, 
 but by no means least, mental powers that were far 
 beyond the average, we may form some idea of the 
 personal attractions which lent their aid to securing 
 for Sister Dora the love and admiration which her 
 noble character and unselfish disposition so abundantly 
 merited.
  
CHAPTER II.
FREEDOM CLAIMED AND LIBERTY RESIGNED.
It was when Dorothy Pattison was in the first flush 
 and vigour of early womanhood that all England 
 was moved with the story of Florence Nightingale's 
 heroism and self-sacrifice in tending the wounded 
 during the Crimean war.
No wonder that Dora became fired with enthusiasm, 
 and longed to join the band of nurses who went out 
 to help. It would have been work exactly to her 
  taste; the travel and adventure which it involved, 
 with perhaps a spice of danger added, appealed irresistibly 
 to every instinct of her brave and compassionate 
 nature, and she implored her father to let her go.
Mr. Pattison, however, did not sympathise with his 
 daughter's aspirations; we venture to think he did 
 not understand her character, nor the urgings of rare 
 though perhaps unconscious capability that were impelling 
 Dora to seek a wider sphere for her energies 
 than quiet home-life in a tiny village could possibly 
 afford.
He pointed out to her the indisputable fact that 
 her want of training and discipline would stand very 
 much in the way of her success in the mission which 
 she wished to undertake; but instead of allowing her 
 an opportunity of acquiring the necessary experience, 
 he told her that her home duties were sufficient for 
 her, if only she would think so.
Studying the girl's character in the light of her 
 after-achievements, we cannot but judge that her 
 father somewhat miscalculated her ability and energies, 
 and the exercise which they craved; and, while 
 we should be far from encouraging the conceit of 
 every inexperienced girl who felt herself fitted for 
 higher things and rebelled at the humble ministries 
 which life demanded of her, we think that Dorothy 
 Pattison was sufficiently unique in both mental and 
 physical constitution to be pardoned for desiring more 
 room for the development of her extraordinary powers.
She has been called "restless," and represented as 
 finding home-life "distasteful," but it seems to have 
 only been the restlessness of a strong young creature 
 chafing against the bars of a too narrow cage.
  
Dora, however, submitted for some years to the 
 parental prohibition, and busied herself, with her 
 sister, in nursing their mother, who was a great invalid, 
 and in paying long visits to her elder brother, 
 Mr. Mark Pattison, of Lincoln College, Oxford, who 
 allowed her to help him both in his literary and 
 mechanical work.
It was during one of her visits to this brother that 
 Dora experienced one of those singular presentiments 
 to which she all her life paid great, and, as it several 
 times appeared, not unfounded regard. She had a 
 dream, in which her mother appeared to her, drawing 
 back the curtain of her bed and calling her by name.
Fearing to be laughed at by her matter-of-fact 
 brother, she forbore to tell him of this dream, but the 
 next night it was repeated, her mother calling her as 
 before, and looking worn and ill. Then Dora insisted, 
 in spite of her brother's ridicule, in sending to the 
 neighbouring town for letters; and one was found 
 there, three days delayed, which told that Mrs. Pattison 
 was dangerously ill.
Dora set off homeward at once, to be with her 
 mother, who was lying upon her death-bed, and shortly 
 afterwards passed away.
After this bereavement, Dora's desire to leave home 
 was stronger than ever. She longed to join a Church 
 of England sisterhood, calling themselves the Good 
 Samaritans, with some members of which she had 
 become acquainted when visiting Redcar. Still Mr. 
 Pattison disapproved; it was from him apparently 
 that Dora inherited her inflexible will, along with his 
 well-proportioned figure and stately bearing. Such 
 instances of heredity are no uncommon cause of 
  friction between parent and child. But, eventually, a 
 sort of compromise was arrived at, Dora being permitted, 
 though not cordially, to accept the position of 
 village school-mistress in the parish of Little Woolston, 
 near Bletchley, on the borders of Buckinghamshire.
Mr. Pattison told her that he should give her no 
 more than the allowance she had always received, 
 which, in addition to the school-mistress's modest 
 salary, was all she would have to live upon. Possibly 
 he imagined that the young lady would soon tire of 
 a life of hard work and comparative privation and be 
 glad to return, with chastened spirit, to the comforts 
 of an affluent home.
With many, such would have been the result, but 
 not with Dorothy Pattison. For three years she lived 
 bravely and cheerily at Woolston, in a cottage all 
 alone, and with no help in her domestic work except 
 that of an old woman who came occasionally to do 
 the hardest scrubbing.
She always loved little children, possessing a rare 
 faculty for controlling, even while she made herself 
 one with them; securing obedience to necessary rules 
 in school time, though in play-hours she became a 
 child again herself, delighting "in animals, flowers, a 
 sunshiny day, a roll in a hay-cock, or a game of play 
 of any kind."
Needless to say, Dora's beauty, her charming and 
 high-bred manners, her ready smile, and the affectionate 
 interest she took in her scholars and their 
 homes, made her greatly beloved at Little Woolston, 
 and here, too, among the poor and sick, she gained a 
 great deal of that tact and experience which was by-and-by 
 to be so useful to her.
  
Although the young school-mistress did the most 
 menial of her own house work, even blacking her grate 
 with her own pretty hands, she was soon recognised 
 as "a perfect lady" by those among whom she had 
 taken up her abode. An old gentleman and his wife 
 in the neighbourhood took such a fancy to her that 
 they offered to make her their heiress. This gentleman, 
 after Dora had left Little Woolston, used to send 
 her ten pounds regularly every year to do as she liked 
 with, on condition only that she should not acknowledge 
 the gift. However, she did acknowledge it—
 a piece of her old wilfulness—which eventually caused 
 the privilege to be withdrawn.
A neglected cold—Dora, like most women of her 
 type, finding it much easier to take care of others than 
 of herself—resulted in a sharp attack of pleurisy, and 
 brought her work at Little Woolston to an end. She 
 went to Redcar to recuperate, and here the old yearning 
 to join the Sisterhood was revived. She only 
 went back to the scene of her scholastic labours to say 
 good-bye to her friends, and then, in the autumn of 
 1864, she attached herself to the Sisterhood of the 
 Good Samaritans.
It is difficult to say whether, up to this point, Dora, 
 notwithstanding her many good qualities, could be 
 called a truly converted character. Before leaving 
 home the first time, she had come under the influence 
 of a mind more powerful than her own, and one 
 which, alas! had tended only to shake her faith in the 
 authenticity and inspiration of the Scriptures. Perhaps 
 it was in the hope that amid distinctly religious 
 associations her difficulties might melt away; or 
 perhaps she sought the aid of outward discipline in 
  enabling her to manage that strong and indomitable 
 will which might prove her greatest blessing, or the 
 reverse. However that may be, Dorothy Pattison at 
 the mature age of thirty-two voluntarily yielded herself 
 up, mind and body, to the dictates of a "Mother 
 Superior," and became "Sister Dora" for evermore.
Everyone knows of the severe drilling in absolute 
 submission and unquestioning obedience to which 
 members of these sisterhoods, whether Romish or 
 Protestant, are subjected; that any intelligent human 
 being should relinquish her independence to the extent 
 demanded by those in authority is a marvel, and 
 it is a greater marvel that such regimen should often 
 appear most attractive to self-willed characters; but 
 perhaps those feel a need of being broken in.
Sister Dora, however, was not conquered all at once, 
 if indeed at all. The rough and menial work which 
 was demanded of her was distasteful, and she sat 
 down and cried, when, already tired out with heavy 
 and unaccustomed labour, she was commanded to remake 
 the beds which she had just put in order, and 
 which had been immediately pulled to pieces at the 
 whim of some superior authority. Nevertheless, she 
 was afterwards wont to assert that this harsh treatment 
 was "good" for her. No doubt, the intimate 
 knowledge of all departments of domestic work which 
 she gained at Coatham—where the head-quarters of 
 the sisterhood were situated—proved most useful to 
 her in her later life.
After a while, Sister Dora was removed to a more 
 congenial sphere of labour, namely, a Cottage Hospital 
 at North Ormesby, near Middlesborough, which was 
 worked by the "Samaritan" Sisters. And here she 
  obtained her first practical knowledge of hospital 
 management.
In the early part of 1865, she was sent to Walsall, 
 afterwards to be indissolubly connected with her name.
Here, in one of the grimiest towns of the "Black 
 Country," had been established a small hospital for 
 the relief of accidents, under the control of the "Good 
 Samaritans." At first the Sisters had been much 
 opposed, owing to their supposed leanings towards 
 Roman Catholicism, but gradually they won for themselves 
 a good reputation by deeds of kindness and 
 mercy, and almost the last instance of active persecution 
 was the throwing of a stone at Sister Dora soon 
 after her arrival, with the jeer of "There goes one of 
 those Sisters of Misery!" We may add that she not 
 long after had the pleasure of piling "coals of fire" 
 upon the head of her assailant, by her devoted care of 
 him when suffering from an injury received in a coal-pit.
Sister Dora had not been long at Walsall before 
 she caught small-pox from the out-patients. She was 
 very ill for some time, but does not seem to have had 
 her beautiful skin marred in the slightest degree by 
 the dreadful disease.
At this first visit our heroine was allowed to remain 
 but a short time at Walsall, and seems for the remainder 
 of that year (1865) to have been sent backwards 
 and forwards between Coatham, Walsall, and 
 other places, in a disturbing fashion, probably designed 
 to complete her education in perfect obedience.
But the finishing touch as regarded that indispensable 
 virtue was given about the middle of December.
The people of Walsall had by this time seen enough 
 of Sister Dora to have some idea of her superior 
  capabilities as a nurse. When, therefore, the Sisterhood 
 proposed removing her permanently to Middlesborough, 
 the committee and medical attendants at 
 the Walsall Hospital objected.
While this subject was under discussion, news came 
 to Sister Dora that her father was lying dangerously 
 ill at Hauxwell. Having just received orders to go and 
 nurse a private case in Devonshire, she telegraphed to 
 Coatham for permission to go to her father instead.
It was refused, and the order to set out for Devonshire 
 peremptorily repeated.
Dorothy's behaviour at this crisis shows, as Mrs. Henry 
 Fawcett wisely observes, "the paralysis of moral sense 
 which this cast-iron system (of obedience) produces."
The woman who resolutely followed the dictates of 
 her own judgment in joining this Sisterhood when all 
 her relations and friends were strongly opposed to it, 
 had, in little more than one year, become so crushed 
 and spiritless as to actually turn her back upon her own 
 dying father at the command of a "Mother Superior"!
But the punishment which she thus brought upon 
 herself, terrible as it was, seems to have stung Sister 
 Dora into something like healthy life again.
The poor old father died, without a last glimpse of 
 the "Sunshine" for whom he craved. Then, Dora 
 received permission to attend his funeral. But possibly 
 shrinking from meeting her family under such 
 painful circumstances, this was declined, with some 
 bitter but well-deserved allusions to the prohibition 
 which had preceded it; and from that time the bonds 
 were gradually loosened between Sister Dora and 
 the powers at Coatham, until eventually she became 
 once more free.
  
CHAPTER III.
"A WINGLESS WEEK-DAY ANGEL."
The authorities connected with the "Good 
 Samaritan" Sisterhood having agreed to allow 
 Sister Dora to remain in charge of the hospital at 
 Walsall, she entered upon her permanent duties there 
 with an eagerness which was doubtless in some measure 
 an attempt to drown sorrow with incessant work.
An intensifying of her religious feelings about this 
 period, and a conviction that she was specially called 
 by the Saviour to bring souls to Himself, would 
 indeed have prompted her to exchange her adherence 
 to the Order of the "Good Samaritans" for one of 
 even stricter rule, demanding vows of celibacy, but 
 this time the advice of friends prevailed, and she 
 decided to remain where she was.
Sister Dora commenced her labours at Walsall so 
 modestly and unobtrusively that her coming seems 
 to have made no memorable impression upon anyone 
 whom she met; but, like the broken cruse of perfume, 
 a life like hers, pouring out sweetness and balm, could 
 not long be hid. When her self-neglectful habit of 
 sitting in damp clothes, rather than take the time and 
 trouble to change them, eventually resulted in a 
 severe illness, the anxious inquiries about her with 
 which the hospital was besieged showed that her 
 ministries among the very poorest of the people—
 those who were actually too low and wretched even 
 to present themselves among the out-patients for treatment—had 
 not been without the fruit of grateful love.
It was during this illness that Dorothy made the 
  acquaintance of the Rev. Richard Twigg, incumbent 
 of St. James's, Wednesbury, whose teaching was her 
 spiritual food and inspiration, and whose sympathy 
 was her chief human support during the remainder of 
 her life. It has been said that Mr. Twigg was almost 
 the only friend who took pains not to gratify that love 
 of admiration—excusable in so rarely and variously 
 gifted a woman, if in any one!—which sometimes 
 threatened to become a blemish in Sister Dora's 
 beautiful character. He was not rendered dumb, as 
 were most of the other men she met, by the charm of 
 her brightness and beauty, but boldly found fault 
 with her when he thought there was occasion, and by 
 this means won her deepest respect.
In 1867, the Cottage Hospital proving inadequate 
 to the needs of an increasing population, a larger one 
 was built in a higher and more healthy situation. 
 Here, in 1868, Sister Dora assumed full charge, and 
 with the exception of one helper, a Mrs. H., who had 
 known and loved her from childhood, and a couple of 
 domestic servants, had the sole management of both 
 indoor and out-patient departments; thus earning 
 from her great friend, Bishop Selwyn, the well-merited 
 title of "the one-horse chay."
Almost our heroine's first experience in her new 
 quarters was that of an epidemic of small-pox.
Already exposed as the hospital and all connected 
 with it were to the risk of contagion from out-patients, 
 who sometimes came to have their wounds dressed 
 with the eruption actually upon them, Sister Dora 
 thought it could hardly be increased if she ventured 
 to nurse the poor sufferers in their own homes. Thus, 
 by economising her time, curtailing her own mealtimes 
  and rest, and by lavish expenditure of that 
 strength and energy with which she was so phenomenally 
 endowed, she contrived to keep up all customary 
 attendance to cases at the hospital, and also 
 to carry her helpful ministrations into many a plague-stricken 
 lane or slum of the town.
One night she was watching alone the last hours of 
 a poor man who was dying of small-pox in its most 
 virulent form. He was much attached to her, and as 
 he felt his end nearing, probably being past realising 
 the loathsome condition he was in, he raised himself 
 up in bed and said, "Sister, kiss me before I die!"
And, taking him in her arms, Sister Dora complied 
 with his request. Afterwards, in total darkness, the 
 one bit of candle having expired, she sat with him 
 until he died.
Her knowledge of surgery—obtained at first 
 by careful attention to the painstaking teaching 
 of the doctor who attended the old hospital—had 
 by this time become greatly enlarged. She was extremely 
 clever at bone-setting, having, as might be 
 expected, an exquisitely delicate touch, and she was 
 strongly opposed to amputation except in cases of 
 extreme danger.
On one occasion it was her proud and happy 
 experience to save, by three weeks' incessant care, 
 the mangled right arm of a young man who had met 
 with a machinery accident, after the surgeon attending 
 the case had declared it to be impossible. She called 
 it her arm, and long afterwards, when she was herself 
 ill, the grateful patient would ring at the hospital 
 door to inquire how she was, sending in the message, 
 "Tell Sister it's her arm that pulled the bell!"
  
Sister Dora was a great believer in the efficacy of 
 prayer, and in this instance, as in many others, held 
 that it was in answer to her fervent entreaties that the 
 healing was granted which she so earnestly besought.
The sick children loved her. No one was so bright 
 and funny with them as Sister Dora, no one was so 
 strong and patient, or told such charming tales. Those 
 who cried most bitterly for their mothers could soon be 
 pacified if carried about by her on one arm, while she 
 attended to the wants of grown-up patients with her 
 other hand; and they would allow her to do things for 
 them without a murmur that no one else could attempt.
Sister Dora's ever bubbling humour and merriment 
 was one of her greatest gifts, and an inestimable blessing 
 both to herself and her charges. She managed 
 to see the comical side in almost everything, and to 
 make others share in her amusement.
The singularly perfect balance of her whole being, 
 physical strength in proportion to her mental energy, 
 and practical ability equal to both, had no doubt much 
 to do with this marvellous woman's joyous and hopeful 
 disposition; for there was no wearisome fretting of 
 the body against the spirit, and vice versâ, no chafing 
 of what she would do against the limitations of what 
 she could. With Sister Dora, to will was to do. At 
 the same time it is on record that her fortitude under 
 physical pain was nothing short of Spartan; personal 
 suffering she was able absolutely to ignore, and as was 
 proved in her latter years she was able to work, to be 
 cheerful and gay, even as it appeared, to thoroughly 
 enjoy herself while bearing serious discomfort, if not 
 acute pain.
Her muscular strength has been described by a 
  doctor who knew her intimately as simply "gigantic." 
 If a heavy man threw himself out of bed in delirium, 
 she would pick him up in her arms as if he had been 
 a child and put him back again. She was even known 
 to carry, unaided, the dead body of an adult patient 
 from the ward where he died, to the mortuary, rather 
 than allow the corpse to remain in the same apartment 
 with sick persons.
This strength of limb was matched by firmness of 
 nerve and general power of endurance. When the 
 never-to-be-forgotten explosion occurred at the Burchills 
 Ironworks, in which eleven men were most shockingly 
 burned by molten metal, no woman could go 
 near the unhappy sufferers on account of the fearful 
 sight and smell of their charred bodies, but Sister Dora. 
 Even the medical men of the town were "incessantly 
 sick, and could hardly stay in the ward."
For ten days on this occasion she never went to bed, 
 and scarcely ever left the ward. Her friend, the 
 secretary of the hospital, did all he could for her, and 
 one brave lady helper contrived to stay with her at 
 night. Only two of the sufferers recovered, and it 
 soon became evident that the ward in which they had 
 all been nursed had become so completely impregnated 
 with the poison from their wounds as to be 
 rendered permanently useless, case after case of erysipelas 
 occurring in subsequent patients.
This ultimately necessitated the pulling down of 
 nearly the whole hospital, but of that more anon. We 
 mention the episode here, though it belongs to a later 
 period of Sister Dora's history, as an instance of what 
 she could and did bear in the way of personal inconvenience 
 for the sake of her patients.
  
She never wearied of attending to their smallest 
 needs. Above every bed was a rope communicating 
 with a bell at the head of her own bed. No matter 
 how many times in the night the bell was rung, no 
 sufferer ever had to ring twice to bring Sister Dora to 
 his side, and ever she came with a bright face.
"Don't trouble about that!" was her cheerful reply, 
 if any of her charges apologised for often disturbing 
 her. "I am here to wait upon you, and I am always 
 pleased to render you any assistance in your suffering."
Sister Dora's courage equalled her endurance. She 
 would venture on her errands of mercy into the lowest 
 parts of the town, amongst persons of the worst repute, 
 at any hour of the day or night. She would not 
 hesitate to interfere in a street brawl, and with her 
 own strong hands part the furious combatants. 
 But the moral influence won by her compassionate 
 tenderness to the poorest of the people, of whom in 
 the course of years there were few who had not for 
 some cause or other passed under her care, was such 
 that Sister Dora was a sacred being in Walsall, and her 
 very name a talisman to ensure immunity from harm.
When war was being waged in Servia, our heroine 
 longed to go out and nurse the wounded, circumstances 
 just then offering some possibility of leaving, 
 for a time, her hospital work.
"But, Sister Dora," it was suggested, "do you think 
 your sex or position would be a safeguard against 
 those barbarous Turks?" "No, not at all," was the 
 reply. "But then I have only one life, and it doesn't 
 altogether rest with them whether I lose it or not." 
 "But they don't kill people right off," argued the 
 objector; "they mutilate them." "Yes; cut off my 
  ears, and my nose; and if they did that, I should say, 
 'Take my life.'" "Well, and if they did all that?" 
 "Then," was the calm response, "I should 'enter into 
 life maimed.'"
Of two things, however, Sister Dora was afraid, 
 dogs (strange to say!) and rats. "She would," says 
 her biographer, Miss Lonsdale, "shrink behind a companion 
 if she met even a very small cur in the streets." 
 And an account of a fight with a rat in one of the 
 hospital passages we have in her own graphic words. 
 She assaulted it with a poker, uttering a scream with 
 every blow she dealt. All the patients who were 
 able to get out of bed, crowded to watch the fray. 
 "Give it him, Sister!" they cried. "But," she concluded, 
 in describing the scene to a visitor, "what 
 nerves he must have had to stand my yells as well as 
 the dabs with the poker! I should have thought 
 either sufficient to frighten any ordinary rat to death."
Our sketch of Sister Dora's character would be 
 sadly imperfect did we not speak of her earnest 
 piety and her constant desire to be a means of 
 bringing health to the souls as well as the bodies of 
 her patients. She read prayers with them daily, 
 taking her stand in such a position on one of the 
 landings that those in each of the three wards could 
 hear and join in, and it was no uncommon thing, 
 when it was her turn to watch at night, for a sick 
 man to find her on her knees by his bedside, praying 
 individually for him.
"Oh, how sorry we shall be," she once wrote to 
 a friend, "(if there be sorrow in heaven), if we should 
 enter in at the gate, and enjoy ourselves to all 
 eternity, to think how little we did to help others 
  on the narrow way! When I think of it I feel as if 
 I could be all day long on my knees, praying for 
 poor sinners; and I am overwhelmed with regret 
 when I think of the hours I have wasted—the souls 
 that have come and gone out of the hospital, and 
 I have not led them to Christ."
Whenever a mission was held in Walsall, Sister 
 Dora, notwithstanding that her life was already 
 crammed to overflowing with work, would not only 
 find time to attend the services herself, but what 
 was infinitely more useful, she would take pains 
 to persuade as many as she could of her present 
 and former patients to go with her.
In this work, her intimate knowledge of, and great 
 influence over the lower classes in the town was an 
 immense help to her. On one occasion, by venturing 
 into one of the vilest slums in the place, she persuaded 
 a number of "fallen" women—a class for whom she 
 had long felt the utmost concern—to go to midnight 
 meetings arranged for their special benefit. During 
 that particular mission week she would seem to have 
 laboured almost incessantly, both by night and day.
Just at that time, her hospital labours were increased 
 rather than diminished by a necessary move 
 into a temporary house; notwithstanding, "as soon 
 as she had 'dressed her wounds' as she called it, and 
 put all her patients to bed, she started forth to her 
 cabmen's gathering. When that was over she must 
 have gone straight on to the midnight meeting; and 
 when it is remembered that she never appeared in the 
 wards of her hospital later than 6.30 A.M., it becomes 
 evident that she burnt both ends of the candle at once, 
 and that pretty fiercely, during the mission week."
  
Sister Dora's devoted friend, Miss Ridsdale, has 
 called her in some sweet verses which we regret that 
 space forbids us to quote, "A wingless, week-day 
 angel," and the whole of her fourteen years' labour at 
 Walsall,—the flower of her all too short life,—was 
 a living embodiment of the sentiments of Wesley's 
 hymn—a great favourite with her, of which one verse 
 exhorts as follows:—
"Then let us attend
Our Heavenly Friend,
In His members distrest,
By want or affliction or sickness opprest;
The prisoner relieve,
The stranger receive;
Supply all their wants,
And spend and be spent in assisting His saints,
By word and by deed,
The bodies in need,
The souls to relieve,
And, freely as Jesus hath given, to give."
In the second small-pox epidemic at Walsall, 
 which occurred in 1875, Sister Dora left the Cottage 
 Hospital on the hill in charge of her assistants, and 
 went to superintend the epidemic hospital down in 
 the town. She was induced to do this by the fact 
 that nothing would persuade the sufferers from that 
 fearfully contagious malady to quit their homes and 
 avail themselves of the isolation so strongly necessary 
 but the knowledge that they were to be nursed by 
 their beloved Sister Dora.
In this place, amid scenes and experiences too 
 loathsome to describe, was the devoted woman immured 
 from February until August of that memorable 
 year, often with little help, or none at all, cooking, 
  cleaning, day and night nursing, all to be done by 
 one pair of hands! No wonder a doctor said—on 
 hearing how she had grappled with a delirious man, 
 a big, heavy fellow, in the worst stage of the disease, 
 holding him in bed by main force until assistance 
 arrived—"Her strength was superhuman. I never 
 saw such a woman."
And if her physical power be so described, what 
 shall we say of her self-sacrificing devotion, when 
 we read that "she was in the habit of bringing back 
 to life, patients who had sunk into the first stage of 
 the fatal collapse which often precedes death from 
 small-pox, by actually putting her mouth to theirs, 
 and breathing into them, until vitality was restored"?
With such an angelic nature, we do not love Sister 
 Dora the less for glimpses of tastes and desires intensely 
 human, and an evidence of her thorough 
 naturalness is afforded by her request, at this trying 
 time, for sensational novels, to keep her awake when 
 watching with the sick at night, and by her naïve confession 
 afterwards, "Oh, I did enjoy those stories!" 
 Indeed, she was ready to enjoy everything from 
 which any form of innocent pleasure—mental, moral, 
 spiritual, or physical—was to be obtained, from the 
 quiet seclusion of the epidemic hospital during Lent, 
 to a peep at a military review, or the comical notion 
 of a patient that a bite from a dog might be healed 
 by plastering the wound with dog's hairs!
She played as vigorously as she worked. Her 
 holidays were few and brief, but how she revelled 
 in them! Laying aside her "sister's" dress for 
 greater freedom and to avoid comment, she bathed 
 or skated, walked or swam, as the season dictated 
  A friend with whom she spent one of her latest 
 vacations says that "under her leadership we scaled 
 fences, forded streams, with or without steppingstones, 
 wished at the Wishing Well, and enjoyed 
 a thorough scramble." Once, when at the sea-side, 
 she merrily took a shrimping-net from the hands of 
 a poor old woman who was wielding it with small 
 success, and soon succeeded in catching for her eight 
 or ten-pennyworth, being proportionately delighted 
 with her success.
She was, indeed, up to this time an instance of 
 mens sana in corpore sano; but, alas! a time was 
 near when that bright spirit would be called to a 
 dire inward conflict with disease and death.
  
CHAPTER IV.
SUNDOWN AT NOON.
It must occur to some readers to wonder that, with 
 all her attractive gifts of mind and body, Sister 
 Dora was never married.
Twice the opportunity was presented to her; the 
 first time, which was before she left Coatham, her 
 affections were not sufficiently engaged to induce her 
 to give up the mode of life she had so recently chosen; 
 but on the second occasion, some years after, she 
 allowed herself to become actually betrothed.
The man, we are told—and how much of Sister 
 Dora's heart-history may not be imagined from those 
 few suggestive words!—"was her superior in every 
 respect but one, he had no faith in revealed religion," 
 and it is hinted that her attachment to him was very deep.
  
Her conduct in permitting an engagement to come 
 about under such circumstances has been criticised by 
 her biographer as most unfair to her lover and disrespectful 
 to the faith which she professed, but we prefer 
 not to sit in judgment upon even the weaknesses 
 of so noble a character. Suffice it to say, that when 
 the friend whose advice she valued beyond all others 
 urged upon her that nothing but apostasy or life-long 
 unhappiness could be expected to result from such a 
 union, she ultimately retracted her promise and turned 
 her back for ever upon the joys of home life, and the 
 possibility, always regarded by her as a supreme blessing, 
 of having little ones of her own to love and tend.
From this time forward, Sister Dora's disregard for 
 her own health became greater than ever, and her 
 confessed longing for the privilege of dying in the 
 service of her fellow-creatures more intense.
It was in 1876 that, owing to the circumstances we 
 have already recorded, it was decided to pull down 
 the hospital which had been in use since 1868, and 
 build a new and larger one. During the reconstruction 
 the patients were removed to a house in the town, 
 which proved very inconvenient and unsuitable for the 
 purpose, besides entailing upon Sister Dora a walk of 
 ten minutes up the hill in all weathers to give attendance 
 in the out-patients' department, which was still 
 left standing, to the sixty or a hundred sufferers who 
 would sometimes be seen by her in a single afternoon.
During the winter succeeding this temporary 
 removal, Sister Dora, for the first time in her experience, 
 began to feel some failure of her wonderful 
 strength. For some weeks she paid little heed, but as 
 the difficulty increased instead of diminishing, she at 
  
STATUE ERECTED TO SISTER DORA AT WALSALL.
   last consulted a medical man, and submitted to an 
 examination.
Soon she knew that the fiat had gone forth—expected, 
 through some strange presentiment, for more 
 than a year past, though not in the guise in which it 
 actually came—"Thou shalt die, and not live."
Impelled by some motive which no one has been 
 able quite to understand, Sister Dora extorted from 
 this doctor a pledge of inviolable secrecy, and went on 
 with her work just the same as usual.
Cancer, the dread disease which had claimed her for 
 its victim, is of slow development. All through the 
 year 1877 it preyed upon this Spartan woman unsuspected 
 by the dearest friend, or those who worked with 
 her night and day. Bright, merry, capable as ever, 
 the only difference which might have struck those who 
 knew her was that a little pony-carriage which had 
 been presented to her as a tribute of gratitude some 
 time before, was used more than formerly for driving 
 to see patients who could not be received into the 
 hospital.
In January, 1878, she wrote in acknowledgment of 
 a letter received on her last birthday:—"I could go on 
 writing until my ideas all ran to ink, and there would 
 be none left. … It was a glad day to me. The world 
 seemed so full of warm, loving hearts. Such lots of 
 nice letters and remembrances; and then, I am so 
 sure of the Loving Heart above, and being another 
 year nearer Home."
To a perplexed young friend she wisely wrote: 
 "No one thing in itself is much better than another, 
 and no one can better themselves in any case by stepping 
 out of the place in which the Master puts them."
  
In the month of June, 1878, Sister Dora went away 
 for a fortnight's holiday, and almost immediately on 
 her return an outbreak of typhoid fever necessitated 
 the closing of the temporary hospital, and again 
 released her from the work which she was destined 
 never to resume. Then, the first use she made of her 
 liberty was to gather together as many of her old 
 patients as she could, with night nurses and servants 
 connected with the hospital, and treat them all to a 
 day's outing at Lichfield.
In the light of our knowledge that she had entered 
 upon the last half-year of her life, it is almost incredible 
 to read that "she was in unusually high 
 spirits, talking and laughing with them in the train, 
 and actually jumping out to gather some flowers 
 which grew on the railway banks while the train 
 stopped unexpectedly."
A little later she went to join some of her nieces in 
 the Isle of Man, and on this occasion not only enjoyed 
 sea-bathing herself, but took the opportunity of teaching 
 her nieces to swim.
In the autumn she went to Paris, to see the Exhibition, 
 and was delighted with all she saw. But about 
 the end of September came a sudden collapse. She 
 was in London at the time, and at once hurried to 
 Birmingham to consult the doctor who shared her 
 terrible secret. Here she became so very ill, that it 
 was feared she could not be removed to Walsall alive. 
 Early in October, however, the journey was accomplished.
For the next three months Sister Dora's sufferings 
 were agonising. Once she wrote, "I have not had 
 two hours' sleep for four days and nights, but in the 
  midst of the fiery furnace there was a form like unto 
 the Son of God."
Soon, however, writing became impossible, and she 
 could only dictate letters to her friends, who were still 
 kept in ignorance of the true nature of her complaint, 
 and the disease being complicated with lung trouble 
 which caused a racking cough, everybody believed 
 that she was dying of consumption.
On the 4th of November, the new hospital was 
 declared by the Mayor to be open "in the name of 
 Sister Dora." It was a pathetic ceremony, for it 
 was then known to all that in spite of lingering 
 hopes, their "dear lady's" bright face would never 
 smile among them again.
It was hard to realise, for she still rallied again 
 and again, her marvellous constitution resisting the 
 inroads of disease. On her better days, she would 
 receive many visitors, and laugh and joke with them 
 as of old, until the thought of death in connection 
 with that irrepressible spirit appeared impossible. 
 But there were other times when the horror of the 
 approaching struggle seemed almost to overwhelm 
 her. She believed it probable that the end would 
 come during one of her severe fits of coughing, and 
 the idea was terrible to her. Nevertheless, one of 
 her nurses, who had watched many death-beds, 
 testified, "I never saw such faith and patience."
During the week before Christmas, she repeatedly 
 said, "I hope I shall sing my Christmas Carol in 
 heaven!" But release had been so long expected 
 and delayed that as the days passed on it seemed 
 unlikely that her desire would be granted.
But Heaven was merciful, and the last earthly 
  wish of this prayerful soul who had won so many 
 boons for others was not to be refused. On the 
 afternoon of the 24th of December, the spirit of 
 Sister Dora passed peacefully and painlessly away.
The funeral, by her own special request, was as 
 plain as possible, but it was attended by grief-stricken 
 mourners in throngs, from almost every 
 rank in society, bishops and town magnates, rough 
 men and ragged women, testifying alike, with tearful 
 eyes, to the sincerity of their sorrow.
Various memorials have been raised by the people 
 of Walsall in honour of her whom they love to call 
 "Our sister Dora." £700 were collected for the 
 Convalescent Home which was the object nearest 
 to her heart at the time of her death; a life-like 
 portrait of her was painted for the Board-Room of 
 the Hospital; and a magnificent stained-glass window, 
 costing about £300, was placed in the parish church.
But the grandest and most conspicuous of all is 
 the beautiful statue of Sister Dora, which occupies 
 a central position in the town; this, with its pedestal 
 and relievo representing her attending to the sufferers 
 from the Burchills Explosion, cost £1050, a great 
 part of which was contributed in small sums by the 
 working-men, who preferred a white marble statue to 
 any other form of memorial. It was unveiled in the 
 autumn of 1886, in the presence of about 40,000 
 spectators.
Commenting on this event, the Standard summed 
 up the character of Sister Dora as "a warm-hearted, 
 tender, unaffected woman, who was loved—as Charles 
 Lamb was said to love his friends—not in spite of 
 her faults, but was loved, faults and all."
