dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Cochrane_Peerless Women  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
SISTER DORA, 
 WALSALL'S TRUEST AND BEST FRIEND.
CHAPTER I.
childhood.
Some eighty odd years ago the rector of 
 Hauxwell, a lonely village near Richmond, 
 in the North Riding of Yorkshire, was the 
 Rev. Mark James Pattison, a man of much learning, 
 and descended 
 from a very old 
 Devonshire family. 
 The rectory, a charming 
 house not far 
 from the church, was 
 perhaps one of the 
 happiest homesteads 
 in that remote little 
 parish.
All day long, laugh 
 and song and the 
 patter of childish feet could be heard within its 
 walls, and of the little Pattisons perhaps the 
 gayest and most winsome was Dorothy. The 
 children were carefully trained by their parents 
 to be kind and helpful to those in need, to be 
 obedient and dutiful at home, and courteous to all.
Now Dorothy, as a young child, being far from 
 strong, was never given any regular instruction, 
 but, being most observant, she thought about all 
 that she saw, and thus learned much more than 
 might have been expected. These thoughtful 
  moods were noticeable only when Dorothy was 
 not feeling well, for at other times she was full 
 of fun and frolic, and never so happy as when 
 devising some bit of mischief.
One point in her character became clear when 
 she was still young. If she made up her mind 
 to do a certain thing, nothing turned her from her 
 purpose; she made no fuss when opposed, but, in 
 a quiet way, managed to attain her end.
Many children would have been very much 
 cast down by so much illness; but Dorothy 
 Pattison had the happy faculty of always looking 
 on the bright side of things, so that an illness 
 over was soon forgotten. When about fourteen 
 years of age, she was so dangerously ill that it 
 was a long time before she fully recovered.
During this time she suffered intense pain, but 
 she bore it with so much patience and sweetness as 
 to win golden opinions from her nurses. The self-control 
 and power of endurance thus early shown 
 she retained to the end of her life, and there is no 
 doubt that these characteristics helped her through 
 trials which repelled those unfortunate enough to 
 lack them.
From this time Dorothy's health improved 
 wonderfully, and she was able to take her share 
 of the duties that all the Pattison children were 
 taught they owed to their poorer neighbours. 
 Fortunately, they had the means to do a great 
 deal of good, for their mother was the daughter 
 of a Richmond banker, named Winn, whose 
 family was noted for great liberality.
Dorothy and her sisters felt that to give away 
  what needed no sacrifice on their part was not 
 true giving; so they frequently wore their clothes 
 till quite shabby in order to give the money thus 
 saved to the poor. It is also said that they 
 sometimes ate bread and cheese themselves so as 
 to give their good dinners to others. It was a 
 common thing to see them carrying tins of hot 
 soup to the poor cottagers in the winter-time. 
 Indeed, they spared neither bodily effort nor 
 power of mind, in their anxiety to do good, and 
 the people of the village grew to love them.
Once, when Dorothy was away from home, one 
 of the village boys fell ill with typhoid fever. His 
 one wish was to see "Miss Dora," as he called her, 
 and the poor child listened anxiously every day 
 for her carriage wheels. At last she came, and he 
 was the first to hear her. "There's Miss Dora! 
 There she is!" he cried, and, exhausted by the 
 effort, fell back on his pillow.
She went to him at once and remained to the 
 end, nursing him with loving care, and cheering 
 him with her bright smile and comforting words. 
 This was the first time she had done anything of 
 the sort, and even then she was more influenced by 
 the desire to be kind than by the child's suffering.
She was now growing tall and strong like her 
 father, and beautiful of face like her mother. 
 She delighted in games of all kinds, but particularly 
 those best suited to boys. Nothing 
 gave her so much pleasure as a good gallop 
 across the moors, or a ride to hounds with her 
 brothers. Whatever she did, whether work or 
 play, she did with her whole heart: there were 
  no half measures with Dorothy Pattison; if a 
 thing were worth doing, she did it well.
Having a fine voice and a great love for music, 
 she undertook to train the village choir; and, in 
 later years, she comforted many a poor sufferer by 
 singing as she bustled about her many duties. 
 An old friend describes her as "a bright, bonnie 
 maiden, singing about the house." So she grew 
 up to be a cheerful, active, shrewd woman, 
 resolute, steadfast of purpose, and, above all, kind, 
 thoughtful, and sympathetic, with the enviable 
 faculty of forgetting herself in the good of others.
CHAPTER II.
First Efforts.
It was not at all likely that so energetic a girl 
 as Dorothy Pattison could long be satisfied 
 with the placid inactivity of her quiet home. 
 She seemed now to fully realise the amount of 
 human suffering there is in the world, and 
 longed with an intense yearning to do something 
 to relieve it. It is not, therefore, surprising 
 that she earnestly desired to join the band of 
 devoted women who accompanied Miss Florence 
 Nightingale to the Crimea.
Hitherto she had never shown any wish to 
 nurse the sick, nor was it apparent that she had 
 any special ability to do so, while it was quite 
 certain that she had neither training nor experience 
 in such work. Her father pointed all this 
  out to her, advising her to do her duty at home 
 and she would have little time to spare.
In this he was right, for her mother, being now 
 an invalid, needed a great deal of attention; and 
 so Dorothy quietly took her share of the nursing, 
 and was so bright and happy about the house 
 that her father called her his "sunshine." Yet 
 all the while, in her steadfast way, she never forsook 
 her purpose. Occasionally she visited her 
 elder brother, Mark, at Lincoln College, Oxford, 
 proving herself both useful and entertaining, and 
 from him she learned much that went toward 
 making her the noble woman whose memory we 
 hold so sacred.
In the year 1861 her mother died, and Dorothy, 
 having now no place in her home which she felt 
 obliged to fill, was once more consumed with the 
 desire to do her share in the world's work. She 
 had felt much drawn toward a certain sisterhood 
 of Good Samaritans, who, among other charitable 
 works, conducted a convalescent home at Coatham, 
 near Redcar in Yorkshire.
Finding that her father had a very strong 
 objection to her joining the sisterhood, she 
 refrained at that time from doing so, although 
 thoroughly determined that some useful work she 
 must and would find. A mistress was needed for 
 the village school at Woolston, in Buckinghamshire, 
 and this post Dorothy Pattison offered to 
 fill. Her father did not take kindly to the idea, 
 and told her that he should only continue her 
 usual allowance of money.
This, however, did not turn her from her purpose, 
  and so, in order to have something to spare for 
 those in need, she managed to do all but the very 
 heaviest of the work of her little cottage herself.
At Woolston she soon won the affection and 
 esteem not only of the children she taught, but 
 also of the inhabitants of the village: and here 
 she began that self-sacrifice which marked the 
 whole of her after-life. During the three years 
 spent at Woolston she proved herself not only 
 an earnest, lovable schoolmistress, but a friend 
 to anyone in need of such.
In fact she worked so hard, teaching by day and 
 nursing the sick by night, that her health gave 
 way. She became low-spirited and filled with the 
 thought that she was not doing enough for those 
 around her. This weakness and depression ended 
 in a sharp attack of pleurisy, and, as soon as she 
 was well enough to travel, she went to Redcar to 
 recover her strength. Her sympathy with the 
 work of the sisterhood revived, and Dorothy now 
 resolved to join the Good Samaritans.
Her family knew well that the necessary restrictions 
 of such a body would not suit Dorothy's 
 temperament, but all their persuasions availed 
 nothing; she had made up her mind to join, 
 and join she would and did, only to prove in 
 time that her friends knew her better than she 
 knew herself. Yet so attentively and intelligently 
 did she perform all the duties required of her, that 
 none even guessed she had made a mistake.
Her sweet graciousness of manner, sunny smile, 
 and earnest devotion to duty soon won for "Sister 
 Dora," as she was now called, the love of all with 
  whom she came in contact. Her first knowledge 
 of hospital work was gained at North Ormesby, 
 Yorkshire; but in 1865 she was sent to Walsall, 
 in South Staffordshire, where she shortly afterwards 
 found her life's work.
The cottage hospital in this town had been 
 established about a year, and during that time 
 had been conducted by the sisterhood of Good 
 Samaritans in the face of the most obstinate 
 opposition of the people whom it was meant to 
 benefit. They had an intense dislike of Roman 
 Catholicism, to which faith they believed the sisters 
 belonged, and showed it in a very unmistakable 
 way. Sister Dora was, perhaps, the last to suffer 
 from their active opposition.
While walking along a street one day a lad threw 
 a stone at her, making a nasty cut on her forehead. 
 Now Sister Dora, having once seen a face, never 
 forgot it; and so it happened that when one day, 
 some time later, this same lad was taken into the 
 hospital seriously hurt, she knew him at once. 
 All the skill at her command, and the care and 
 loving attention of which she was capable, she 
 lavished upon him; and so utterly ashamed of 
 his brutality toward her did the lad feel, that he 
 was not happy till he had confessed his fault and 
 obtained her forgiveness
  
CHAPTER III.
The Friend of the People.
Sister dora now returned to Coatham, and 
 was shortly afterwards chosen by an eminent 
 physician to take charge of a most difficult 
 case. The patient was an eccentric old lady, who, 
 becoming very much attached to her nurse, wished 
 to make her some very valuable presents. These 
 were at first graciously but firmly refused, but 
 finding that this vexed her patient greatly, Sister 
 Dora afterwards took them from her and then 
 secretly restored them to the family. Upon the 
 death of this old lady Sister Dora returned to 
 Walsall, where, with few intervals, she continued 
 to work for thirteen years.
She suited the doctors so well that they begged 
 the sisters to be allowed to keep her altogether; but 
 this they were not disposed to do. She was ordered 
 to go at once to Devonshire, to nurse a private 
 patient; but, before starting, she received news 
 that her father was dangerously ill, and wished 
 to see her very much. On applying for leave to 
 go home, the sisters replied that her orders were 
 to proceed immediately to Devonshire, which she 
 did with a very sore heart.
On arriving, news reached her that her father 
 was dead, and that it was her duty to attend the 
 funeral. Permission to do so came from Coatham; 
 but Sister Dora felt that as she had not been 
 allowed to see her father while still alive, she had 
  no desire to avail herself of such permission. She 
 therefore diligently fulfilled the duties required of 
 her until she was no longer needed, when she once 
 more returned to Walsall.
From this time she ceased to take any deep 
 interest in the sisterhood of Good Samaritans, 
 though she remained one of them for some years 
 longer. She now set herself to study diligently 
 all the details of her profession, and so great was 
 her earnestness and intelligence that she attracted 
 the attention of an old doctor, who taught her 
 all he knew of surgery.
She eventually became not only a skilful surgeon 
 but a successful one, for she inspired her patients 
 with such unbounded confidence in her power to 
 heal them, that they willingly agreed to all she 
 suggested.
The employment of the people of this district 
 being very productive of accidents to the eye, she 
 determined to take a course of lectures at the 
 Ophthalmic Hospital, Birmingham, so as to be 
 able to deal with such cases. There was no 
 resident surgeon in the Walsall hospital, and so it 
 fell to Sister Dora to treat all casualties brought 
 in; and this was one reason why she was so 
 anxious to learn all that could possibly help in 
 the immediate alleviation of pain. So thorough 
 a knowledge of both theoretical and practical 
 surgery did she at last obtain that she was considered 
 to be much cleverer than many ordinary 
 doctors.
And all this time she was fighting inward 
 battles with herself—battles in which self-pleasing 
  and self-abnegation were strongly opposed. Should 
 she, forgetting all that a home of her own and 
 the society of cultivated people would be to her, 
 continue the work she had begun so well, and 
 devote the whole of her life to the needs of the 
 sick, the poor, and the friendless?
Would she have sufficient strength of mind to 
 withstand future temptation of similar kind, or 
 should she, by joining a stricter sisterhood, remove 
 herself beyond the power of such temptation?
In her difficulty she sought the advice of an 
 old friend, who pointed out to her how peculiarly 
 suited she was to the work she had undertaken, 
 and that he thought she would certainly find her 
 chief happiness in promoting the welfare of those 
 suffering ones to whom her heart had really been 
 given, rather than in yielding to a passing fancy 
 which would, all too soon, prove unsatisfying to a 
 nature such as hers.
So, in her quiet, purposeful manner, she continued 
 her hospital work until, in 1866, she had a 
 very serious illness. Then the people realised all 
 that she had become to them; they felt that she 
 was their friend, and they could not spare her. 
 Who but Sister Dora would come to them at any 
 hour of the night to set a broken limb, to bandage 
 a gaping wound, to soothe a riotous drunkard, or 
 comfort the last moments of the dying?
Many anxious inquiries were made at the door 
 of the hospital, and prayers were offered on her 
 behalf at the church of St. James, Wednesbury.
Now Sister Dora had an almost superstitious 
 belief in the power of prayer, and so she liked to 
  think that her recovery was due to these petitions 
 of the people, and she loved them even more than 
 before.
CHAPTER IV.
A Few of the Actions that Won their Hearts.
The hospital committee now decided to erect 
 a new building, as the old one was not only 
 too small for the needs of the people but 
 was very badly placed for purposes of ventilation. 
 Sister Dora gave a good contribution towards the 
 expenses, and the rest of the money was soon 
 obtained. A site was chosen on the hill on 
 which the parish church stands; the work went 
 steadily forward, and, in 1868, the new hospital 
 was ready.
It was divided into three wards, and contained 
 twenty-eight beds—with convenience for more, if 
 needed—good accommodation for out-door patients, 
 and every appliance known at that time. It was 
 so arranged that one active person could manage 
 the whole of the nursing, and this Sister Dora did.
She washed the patients, made their beds, dressed 
 their wounds, fed them, sewed for them, read to 
 them, played games with them in her rare intervals 
 of leisure, and never omitted prayers even on the 
 busiest mornings, standing in such a position that 
 the patients in all the wards could hear her. She 
 taught them to go to God in all their trials, and 
 impressed on their minds that if they really had 
 faith. He would grant their requests.
  
She was never wearied by their wants, and waited 
 upon them as willingly by night as by day. Her 
 sunny smile, her winsome manner, her ever-present 
 cheeriness and ready sympathy helped greatly 
 toward the recovery of many of the poor sufferers 
 under her care. One man said of her, "Make 
 you laugh? She'd make you laugh if you were 
 dying!"
Many of the poor men sought to relieve their 
 feelings, when in great pain, by using bad 
 language, but this Sister Dora would by no means 
 allow. "Stop that!" she would say; "if you 
 really must say something, say poker and tongs!" 
 Then looking round with a bright face, she would 
 add, "Now remember, nothing but 
poker and 
 tongs!"
 and away she would go, feeling confident 
 that she would be obeyed.
Just at this time small-pox broke out in the town 
 and spread rapidly, so that Sister Dora had plenty 
 to do outside the hospital. She never refused to 
 attend a case, and the more loathsome it was the 
 more readily did she render help. One night she 
 was sent for to a man who was dying of the black-pox. 
 His wife and friends had all deserted him, 
 and he was alone in a house situated in one of 
 the worst slums of the town.
On reaching the wretched dwelling she found 
 that there was but one small piece of candle left; 
 so she gave a woman some money to buy some 
 more for her. The woman failed to bring the 
 candles, and so the good sister sat the whole of 
 the night alone and in darkness with the poor 
 diseased and dying man.
  
Once during the long hours he said to her, 
 "Kiss me before I die, sister!" and, putting her 
 arms around the poor fellow, heedless of disease, 
 she granted his last request. Shortly afterwards 
 he passed peacefully away, but still she sat on, 
 until, when the dawn broke, she called in some 
 neighbours and returned to the hospital.
About this time an old servant of the Pattison 
 family went to help Sister Dora in her work, and 
 soon became very useful both in managing the 
 domestic arrangements and in nursing.
Some of the patients taken into the institution 
 were terribly crushed by explosions in mines and 
 accidents with machinery—so much so that it was 
 often found necessary to take off a limb as a last 
 means of saving life. Now these poor men did not 
 at all like the idea of amputation, and a great deal 
 of persuasion was needed to gain their consent to 
 such an operation. This usually fell to Sister 
 Dora, for few could resist her charm of manner 
 and quiet though sensible reasoning.
On one occasion, however, she strongly objected 
 to the removal of the arm of a fine young fellow 
 who had met with a terrible accident. His right 
 arm was twisted and torn dreadfully, but Sister 
 Dora's keen eye saw a chance of saving it, and 
 she said so. The doctor found it impossible to 
 agree with her, and, after a time, gave up the case 
 entirely.
The whole responsibility was now undertaken by 
 Sister Dora, and it is very certain that she spent 
 some very anxious days until the result proved that 
 her idea had been a true one. She saved the arm, 
  and with most pardonable pride fetched the doctor 
 to see it, at the end of a fortnight. His astonishment 
 was unbounded, and it is but fair to him 
 to say that he was as pleased as if the credit had 
 been his own.
The young fellow ever afterward called that arm 
 "Sister's arm," and so attached was he to the 
 clever woman who had done so much for him, that 
 some time later, when she was very ill, he walked 
 eleven miles into Walsall every Sunday to inquire 
 for her. Before leaving he always said to the 
 servant, "Tell sister that was her arm that rang 
 the bell!"
CHAPTER V.
Her Influence over the People.
Some of the greatest battles Sister Dora fought 
 were against bad language and drunkenness. 
 Big brawny men hung their heads at her 
 rebuke; coarse jest and foul words died on the 
 lips at her approach; even the poor misguided 
 drunkard tried to straighten himself and walk as 
 a man if she were near.
Alone, at the dead of night, in the lowest 
 slums of the town she walked without fear—a 
 woman such as those poor degraded people had 
 never before dreamed of. They believed in her 
 and they loved her; and they were right in doing 
 so, for she gave them all of her best, and none 
 could do more.
Many men and women left the hospital resolved 
  upon leading better lives for her sake, and to 
 many such she gave ample means of beginning 
 over again in a new world, far removed from 
 old associations and temptations.
The outbreak of war between France and 
 Germany again made her feel that among the 
 wounded and the dying on the stricken field of 
 battle she could find even more to do for God than 
 in Walsall, but, happily for that town, the feeling 
 passed; she found it impossible to leave the people 
 to whom she had grown so dear, and whom she 
 loved with all the depth of her large heart.
Among the convalescents in the hospital she had 
 ever one who hung on her slightest wish, and I 
 feel sure you will be interested to hear about him. 
 He was a poor little fellow of ten, named Sam. He 
 was more than ordinarily sharp and observant, so 
 that, after a time, he was able to prepare for Sister 
 Dora all that she would need in ordinary cases.
One morning he was suffering such intense pain 
 that he felt unable to leave his bed. The poor 
 child hid his head beneath the clothes, that Sister 
 Dora should not be worried by the tears he could 
 not restrain. She knew all about it, however, and, 
 in a little while, she said aloud to another patient, 
 "Tell Sam I do miss him!" Instantly the trouble 
 left the dear boy's face, and, having dressed himself, 
 he went to help the sister as brightly as if 
 there were no such thing as pain in all the world.
Sometimes, looking very gravely at him, she 
 would say, in reference to a wound she was 
 treating, "Now, doctor, what would you do in this 
 case?" and, quite as gravely, Sam would reply, 
   
  "Zinc ointment!" or any other remedy he knew 
 from experience she would be likely to use.
Sister Dora's winsome way with children 
 especially was delightful to see. Poor little mites 
 badly scalded, and brought to her for help, held out 
 their tiny arms and nestled against her bosom as 
 soon as they saw her, and many a sorrowing 
 mother returned to her wretched home with the 
 full assurance that all that human skill and 
 womanly love could do for her suffering child 
 would be done by that great-hearted, capable 
 woman, Sister Dora.
The miserable, neglected little children of the 
 courts and alleys ran smiling to her, knowing well 
 that Sister would have a kiss for them. She was, 
 indeed, a sister to them, and much more, for one 
 of her humble friends said of her, after her death, 
 that she was as like the Lord Jesus Christ as any 
 human creature could be.
One day a dear little girl was brought into the 
 hospital suffering from such dreadful burns that 
 she could not possibly recover. So Sister Dora 
 sat down by the child's bed and told her pretty 
 stories of Heaven and Jesus and the happy angels, 
 until, looking sweetly into the good sister's face, 
 the poor little child said, "When you come to 
 heaven, sister, I will meet you at the gate with 
 a bunch of flowers."
Many of the local railway-men owed both life 
 and limb to her skill, and so, as a token of 
 esteem they bought and presented to her a small 
 carriage and pony. She was greatly touched by 
 their thoughtfulness; and she found the carriage 
  very useful, not only in taking convalescent 
 patients for drives into the country, but also in 
 saving time in her many errands of mercy outside 
 the hospital.
In the autumn of the year 1874 her connection 
 with the sisters of the Good Samaritans ceased. 
 From this time Sister Dora's one great wish 
 was to establish a convalescent home for her 
 patients on the north coast of Wales, as she firmly 
 believed in the healing powers of sea air and 
 bathing, when possible. Such a home now 
 actually exists at Abergele, though unhappily 
 Sister Dora did not live to see it. She was very 
 fond of the water herself, and it is said that during 
 one of her visits to Redcar she saved a woman 
 from drowning by swimming out to her and 
 holding her head above water till help came.
CHAPTER VI.
Her Management of the Epidemic Hospital.
After the last outbreak of small-pox the 
 hospital committee erected an isolation 
 building outside the town, but, when in 
 1875 the disease again appeared, the people 
 absolutely refused to go there. At length Sister 
 Dora wrote to the mayor, offering to take charge 
 of the isolated hospital, and you may be quite 
 sure that her offer was joyfully accepted.
As soon as the people heard that sister would 
 nurse them, they went readily enough to the 
  hospital, and so firm a hold had the disease now 
 obtained that all the beds were soon full. Then it 
 was that Dorothy Pattison thanked God with all 
 her heart for the strength and power of endurance 
 He had given her—for both were tried to the very 
 utmost.
With none but two old women from the work-house 
 to help with the washing, and an old man to 
 act as porter, she did the whole of the work of 
 nursing, washing, cooking for and feeding twenty-eight 
 patients in every stage of the disease. In many 
 cases she was obliged even to make clothes for them; 
 and the babies were a source of constant labour.
Yet her native cheerfulness never forsook her, 
 for in one letter she says, "You would laugh to 
 see me washing my babies. Poor things! they 
 are getting quite fond of me; but they do make 
 some washing!" Yet, in spite of her many 
 duties, she found "time and opportunity to 
 spread the glad tidings to many an ignorant 
 soul;" and she thanked God for her daily life 
 in that abode of disease and death.
When the last patient left the epidemic hospital, 
 some six months later, she returned to the scene of 
 her former labours, and shortly afterwards one of 
 the most fearful accidents the town has ever known 
 occurred in Walsall. An explosion took place at 
 some ironworks near by, and eleven men were 
 literally covered with molten metal.
Hoping to ease their agony they jumped into 
 a canal close at hand, and were rescued with the 
 greatest difficulty. A ward was soon cleared at 
 the hospital for their reception, and then began 
  such a labour of mercy that many a strong man and 
 woman was forced to turn from it, sick and faint.
So ghastly were the wounds of the poor fellows 
 that even Sister Dora could not manage without 
 taking a little brandy as a stimulant. For ten 
 days and nights did this brave woman battle with 
 death, and, in the end, was successful in saving 
 the lives of two of the unfortunate sufferers. One 
 of these two in speaking of her says: "She was 
 with us almost night and day. It did you good 
 only to look at her. What we felt for her I 
 couldn't tell you, my tongue won't say it."
The ward in which these poor men had lain was 
 so full of poisonous germs that no wounds would 
 thereafter heal in it. The committee, therefore, 
 determined to build a new and larger hospital. 
 A temporary building was taken, sufficiently large 
 to hold twelve beds, with very scanty accommodation 
 for the nursing staff, and none for out-patients, 
 who were therefore obliged to receive attention at 
 their old quarters in the condemned hospital.
In 1876 Sister Dora did a great deal of good 
 work among the poor outcast women of the town. 
 A mission was being held, and she added largely 
 to its success by personally conducting the 
 missionaries into the worst haunts of sin and 
 misery. They could never have reached these 
 people alone, for it would have been more than 
 their lives were worth to have ventured into such 
 districts without the protecting care of the woman 
 whom even the vilest men revered.
In the winter of 1877 she discovered that she was 
 suffering from a disease which must end fatally. 
  Binding her medical adviser to secrecy, she continued 
 her labours of love, to all appearance just 
 as strong and healthy as ever. The following 
 Christmas she determined to give her people such 
 a happy time that they would never forget it, for 
 she felt sure that it was her last chance of seeing 
 them thoroughly enjoying themselves.
She threw herself heartily into their games; and 
 no one to look at her could have guessed that the 
 tall, handsome woman would, almost inevitably, 
 pass from the scene of her earthly efforts, to take 
 her share of joy in the kingdom above ere another 
 Christmas Day had dawned.
Knowing how short her time was, she worked 
 with a restless activity that astounded even the 
 hospital committee, accustomed as they were to 
 her untiring energy. She now found her little 
 carriage most useful, for she was frequently called 
 to places quite ten miles from the town.
One night as the old porter was driving her along 
 a quiet country road, a man sprang out of the hedge, 
 and, coming up behind, struck at Sister Dora with 
 a heavy stick. She swerved her head aside just in 
 time to save herself, while the ruffian, hearing the 
 sound of horse-hoofs approaching, made off quickly.
This was but one of the adventures with which 
 she met. But the old porter always said that the 
 man must have been a stranger, for he knew that 
 no Walsall man would touch Sister Dora to do her 
 any harm; and I think he was right. Nothing 
 daunted her, however, and she continued her midnight 
 journeys as usual, for she had really no time 
 during the day to spare outside the town.
  
CHAPTER VII.
Sister Dora's Last Efforts.
The disease had now become so painful that 
 Sister Dora was obliged to consult a Birmingham 
 doctor, in whose opinion she had implicit 
 confidence. From him she learned that the dread 
 cancer had now reached that stage which needed 
 surgical treatment. True to her determination to 
 let none know of her trouble till it was impossible 
 longer to conceal it, she bravely dressed the wound 
 herself and resumed her duties.
Just at this time she was asked by a doctor to 
 assist at an operation on the throat of a child 
 suffering from diphtheria. An incision was made 
 and a silver tube inserted to enable the child to 
 breathe more freely. The little throat was filled 
 with poisonous mucus, and Sister Dora, kneeling 
 beside the child, actually sucked the deadly matter 
 through the incision! The patient recovered from 
 that illness, but at the cost of three weeks' acute 
 suffering to the brave sister.
In June, 1878, upon returning from a short 
 holiday, Sister Dora found it necessary to close 
 the temporary hospital, owing to an outbreak of 
 typhoid fever. The new building not being 
 finished, she decided to have a good long rest 
 among her friends; but, before starting, she took 
 all her old patients and the hospital staff for an 
 outing to Lichfield. She had taken them on many 
 such trips before, but all agreed that they had 
  never seen her so utterly happy and gay as she 
 was on that particular occasion.
Her nieces, too, with whom she afterwards went 
 to stay, remarked the same thing. She seemed 
 even fuller of life than usual, teaching them to 
 swim, and playing many a trick upon them while 
 in the water, so that they had not the faintest idea 
 that she was suffering from a disease that would 
 soon prove fatal.
She next went to Paris, where she visited the 
 Exhibition; afterwards returning to London, with 
 the intention of attending a course of lectures on 
 the treatment of wounds, by Professor Lister. 
 Really she should have been quietly resting at 
 home; for, during her stay in London, her pain 
 increased so rapidly and her cough became so 
 very troublesome, that it was patent to all she was 
 suffering from some malignant form of disease.
Seeing that there was danger of her secret being 
 discovered, she suddenly left London for Birmingham. 
 Now, in her state at that time, such a journey 
 was almost certain death; but, in spite of the grave 
 fears of the doctor, she rallied sufficiently to be 
 taken to Walsall—to die, as she herself wished, 
 among her own people.
The hospital committee prepared a house for her 
 reception, and an old servant was engaged to wait 
 upon and nurse her; but, although the sad news of 
 her illness spread rapidly in the town, no breath of 
 the real trouble was allowed to get abroad. The 
 people absolutely refused to believe that Sister 
 Dora would never more minister to their needs; 
 they seemed to think that she was a being superior 
  to such things as sickness and death; but, when 
 they fully realised the mournful truth, the whole 
 town seemed utterly cast down.
She was now compelled to accept the help of 
 Mrs. H., the old family servant who had been of 
 so much use to her in the hospital, but it was with 
 the greatest reluctance that Sister Dora confided the 
 nature of her trouble even to her. She was gratified 
 by the visits of her sisters, but would not hear of 
 their remaining to nurse her, and it was with aching 
 hearts that they returned to their homes.
Perhaps we may feel inclined to blame her for 
 being so reticent with her own family, but, should 
 it be so, let us remember that her whole life had 
 been one of self-restraint and self-reliance. With 
 an almost painful reluctance to admit that suffering 
 could subdue even her proud spirit, she had 
 striven to conceal her ailments till absolutely forced 
 to give in; yet, all the while, she had secretly 
 dreaded that she would most certainly fall a prey 
 to one of the deadly diseases she had so frequently 
 and successfully combated in others.
During the comparatively short time she was 
 confined to her bed, her old cheeriness never 
 deserted her; her sublime faith in God helped 
 her even then to look on the bright side, for she 
 says, in writing to a friend, "My heart is full of 
 thankfulness for the Good Shepherd's care and 
 tender love towards me. I have not a care; it is 
 all sunshine. Oh, my dear, this peace does indeed 
 pass all understanding. I have so longed to go 
 home. I am so happy."
Although it was not possible for her to see the 
  opening of the new hospital, she had the happiness 
 of knowing it was finished and declared open, in 
 her name, on 14th November 1878. It was a 
 great day to her; she received many visitors, and 
 was saved all anxiety as to the competent management 
 of the institution by the temporary appointment 
 of an old pupil in whom she had every 
 confidence.
CHAPTER VIII.
Sister Dora Wins her Crown of Life.
It had been Sister Dora's custom to give to each 
 cabman in the town some small gift every 
 Christmas; but, fearing she would not be with 
 them much longer, she gave them their presents of 
 warm gloves, scarves, etc., in November, shortly 
 after the opening of the new hospital.
That she should, in the midst of all her pain, 
 so think of them, touched the men's hearts most 
 deeply; and I have no doubt that many of these 
 gifts are even now treasured as souvenirs of the 
 giver, though the actual recipients needed nothing 
 beyond the remembrance of years of steadfast 
 devotion to them and their fellow townspeople 
 to keep her memory ever green in their hearts.
On 24th December, 1878, she passed peacefully 
 away, just in time to sing her Christmas song 
 in heaven, as she so often wished. The muffled 
 pealing of the church bells told the anxious people 
 that the agonies of their loved one were over, and 
 on the following Saturday she was laid to rest in 
  the cemetery just beyond the town. The sad 
 procession comprised members of the public 
 bodies in the town, representatives of all professions 
 and trades, bishops, clergy, and ministers 
 of all denominations, in addition to hundreds and 
 hundreds of people who had benefited by her skill 
 and loving kindness.
For nearly two hours a dense crowd of all sorts 
 and conditions of men, women, and children 
 waited in the snow and the drizzling rain to 
 see the last of her who had never failed them 
 in their time of need. Tears streamed unchecked 
 down the faces of rough men as the mournful 
 cortège passed, and they gazed with uncovered 
 heads upon that which contained all that was 
 noble and good in womanhood to them.
It was in vain the police tried to check the people 
 from crowding into the place of burial. Sister 
 Dora was more dear to the little unwashed street 
 children and the poor neglected slatternly women 
 than any one else they had ever known, and they 
 were there to do their last act of reverence to her 
 who had shown them they had at least one friend 
 in the world, and who had abundantly proved to 
 them that they also had the greatest of all friends 
 in heaven, the Lord Christ Jesus.
Though dead she yet speaks to many who knew 
 and loved her; but, that her memory may live in 
 the generations to come, the people have erected a 
 life-sized statue of her in a prominent part of the 
 town. In the hearts of the people of Walsall she 
 is now, as she was nearly a quarter of a century 
 ago, "Our Sister Dora."
  
In the words of a minister of the town, who 
 knew her well, they might also say: "Not only do 
 we treasure her memory as that of a great and 
 useful worker in the cause of suffering humanity, 
 but for the higher reason, that we have had in her 
 a style of character more sublime than any we have 
 seen before, or, in these days, perhaps, hardly 
 thought possible. Surely the most desirable 
 image to us is that of the most perfect human 
 soul, and, quite as surely, that image has dwelt 
 and worked amongst us in Walsall."
The tomb of this noble woman is frequently 
 visited by people desirous of paying a tribute of 
 respect to the departed, and all are struck by its 
 utter unobtrusiveness. So simple is the cross that 
 marks the resting-place of the much-loving and 
 much-loved sister, that many pass it by without 
 even a glance.
The stranger, knowing her history, seeks some 
 ponderous monument; but to such I would say, 
 that, while her life was for many years lived 
 before the public gaze, she was by nature modest 
 and unassuming—never obtruding herself or her 
 opinions unless assured that by so doing some 
 fellow-being would be benefited.
No mention even of her life's work is made: the 
 simple inscription being:—
IN MEMORY 
 OF 
 SISTER DORA, 
 WHO ENTERED INTO REST 
 ON CHRISTMAS EVE, 1878.
