
Topic title
From The Sunday Magazine: For Family Reading
U Michigan bookplate
Thomas Guthrie, William Garden Blaikie, Benjamin Waugh
London: Isbister, 1880
"SISTER DORA."
By Mrs. CHARLES GARNETT, Author Of "Corbiestanes," "Little Rainbow," Etc.
IN these days of many creeds, of new interpretations of the word of God, and of varied 
doctrines and dogmas, the biography of Sister Dora opens to us breathing space in purer 
air, and lifts us up into the heavenly heights of Christ's Christianity.
A noble woman, beautiful and strong in person and in mind, filled with wonderful energy 
and broad sympathy—a woman capable of great deeds and greater self-sacrifice, and yet 
with human weaknesses, foibles, and failings—rises before us; a saint of these latter days, 
before whose life of usefulness the legendary accounts of those of earlier times seem 
paltry.
We close the book with shame, that the same religion which made Sister Dora so Christ-
like has done so little for ourselves, and yet thanking God she has lived to point the way 
to better things.
On the 16th of January, 1832, in the old Rectory at Hauxwell, a little village some miles 
back from picturesque Richmond, and on the edge of the North Riding moors, a lovely 
child, Dorothy Wyndlow Pattison, was born.
The youngest girl in the Rector's large family—a Yorkshire woman by descent and 
birth—it is not surprising that as she grew out of a feeble childhood into a healthy 
girlhood, she developed a love for music and riding." Her clear and powerful voice had 
that peculiar roundness and richness of sound only to be heard in the favoured district 
where every boy and girl seems to be born singing." Often afterwards that sweet voice 
sang hymns by dying beds, which "Sister " had made easy, or told to suffering lads laid in 
her hospital ward, crushed and disfigured, jolly tales of races over the trackless 
moorlands, wild rides across country, or of following the hounds in many a long run.
Dorothy Pattison grew up tall and strong, with a fine figure, noble bearing, and rounded, 
beautiful face, full of life, fun, and ability. " One of her characteristics was an intense 
love of amusement and of getting fun out of everything; and this she conveyed in no 
mean degree to others through the medium of her own ready wit and originality of 
expression. She had a large share of practical common sense, with a good deal of the 
shrewdness inseparable from the Yorkshire character, and possessed the faculty for 
hitting the right nail on the head, and for seeing to the bottom of a well." As she went 
singing about the old rooms her father named her "Sunshine." Her faults were those to be 
expected: no meanness could live in such a grand nature; but pride, self-will, and 
stubborn determination to have her own way at any cost, did so. But the good Lord made 
even sin to serve his child, and the faults which brought her self-reproach and loneliness 
drove her also to Him who alone could sustain and comfort, and took away the desire to 
live just at the moment where, had not these been conquered, they might have had the 
fullest gratification.
Dorothy remained at home until she was twenty-nine years of age. Often the inner 
consciousness of great powers, joined to a passionate desire for work, made her chafe at 
the dull monotony of her country life. Her mother died suddenly, and soon afterwards she 
made the acquaintance, at the seaside village of Redcar, of the Sisters of the Good 
Samaritans. Their head-quarters are at Coatham, a part of Redcar, where they have a 
Convalescent Home; from this there are branch cottage hospitals in various parts of the 
country. The life of these Sisters seemed to Dorothy Pattison the fulfilment of her ideal, 
and she went back to Hauxwell determined to put herself to use at once—other than was 
to be found at home. Mr. Pattison strongly objected to the religious opinions held by the 
sisterhood, and to his daughter's joining it; but her wilfulness was indomitable, and at 
length, he neither giving nor refusing his consent, she engaged herself as village 
schoolmistress at Little Woolston, in Buckinghamshire, as a kind of half measure. No one 
knew her here, and she lived alone in a small cottage, conducting the village school 
admirably for three years, at the end of which time an attack of pleurisy sent her once 
more to Redcar. Then she gave up her school and joined the sisterhood. Dorothy Pattison 
well knew this was against her father's desire, although he laid no express contrary 
command on her. The remembrance of this conduct afterwards caused her—when her 
eyes were opened—the keenest soirow, and even on her death-bed wrung from her the 
confession, "I was very wilful; I did very wrong." It seems almost like retributive justice 
that these persons, whose self-ordained authority she preferred to ner father's, should, by 
their cruel use of it, have inflicted upon her a misery and a wrongdoing which she could 
never remember without remorse. The restlessness which urged her on this course came 
from an unsatisfied soul filled with doubts. With no real love for her Saviour, and longing 
for "definite authority" to direct her, she went into the Home at Coatham, and from 
thenceforth became known as Sister Dora.
At the Home she learnt to scrub, bake, and make beds, and at length, in 1865, was sent to 
help to nurse at the cottage hospital at Walsall, a town of thirty-five thousand inhabitants, 
in the Black Country, seven miles from Birmingham. Accidents in the coal-pits, blast-
furnaces, and on the railway lines, in this neighbourhood are frequent. The people are a 
wild, rough, brave folk, wicked and warm-hearted, strong for evil and for good.
Sister Dora, who all through life was very susceptible of every kind of infection, 
immediately caught the small-pox. After her recovery she worked on there.
The cottage hospital had lived down the opposition which it had encountered at first, and 
Sister Dora was the last of the Sisters who met with persecution. At the time of the 
Murphy riots, as she went down a street one day, a young man cried out, "There goes one 
of those Sisters of Misery! " and threw a stone which cut open her forehead. Sister Dora 
had the happy faculty of never forgetting a face, and seldom a name; so, shortly 
afterwards, when it happened that this lad was brought into the hospital badly injured 
from a pit accident, she said to herself, "That's my man," and nursed him with the 
tenderest care. One night, when he was recovering, she found him quietly crying. " I 
wouldn't ask him what was the matter," Sister Dora said, " because I knew well enough, 
and I wanted him to confess." At length it came out with many sobs—
"Sister, I threw that stone at you."
"Oh, did you think I did not know that? Why, I knew you the very first minute you came 
in at the door."
" What! you knew me, and have been nursing me like this? "
"You see it was his first practical experience of good returned for evil, and he didn't know 
what to make of it," she said.
Sister Dora was recalled to Coatham, and employed in various ways, until, in November, 
1865, she was sent back to Walsall, and from that time became, as the Walsall people call 
her, "our Sister;" not that this was accomplished without a struggle.
In December the hospital committee received notice that Sister Dora was to be removed 
to Middlesbro'; they remonstrated, and she remained, only immediately afterwards to be 
ordered to Devonshire, to nurse a private patient. At the same moment came a letter 
summoning her home, as her father lay dangerously ill. Remembering the vow she was 
under, she telegraphed to Coatham that another Sister should be sent to Devonshire, and 
for leave herself to go to Hauxwell; and "no" was returned, "go at once to Devonshire." 
The message could only have been sent by these narrow-souled superiors to humble her, 
and it is almost impossible to believe that such a woman as Dorothy Pattison should do 
such a wicked thing as to obey. But so she did, and had hardly reached her destination 
when the news followed her—her father "had gone," without a sight of his Sunshine. The 
Superior, to patch up this cruelty, sent her a tardy permission to attend the funeral, which, 
as useless, Sister Dora declined. Thus began a breach which was never healed—thus was 
the first knot of her self-imposed bondage unloosed; and in later years, as time went by, 
she threw off the yoke entirely.
And another blessing was, day by day, coming to her soul: faith was growing, doubts 
fading away; the Christ, gradually believed in historically, was becoming her Redeemer, 
and her heart, which she had herself closed to earthly affections, was turning with a 
personal, entire devotion to Christ, her "All in All." Much of this she owed to the late 
Rev. Richard Twigg. Under the influence of his noble Christian teaching and daily 
example she developed that burning zeal and spirit of self-sacrifice which henceforward 
distinguished her, and his was the main human support to which she clung. She 
reproduced his Bible-lessons in a simpler form at her Sunday services in the hospitals, 
and many were there taught who will never forget those lessons. He was a true friend ; he 
seldom praised, but often reproved her motives and actions. He pointed out her faults, 
and helped her to correct them, while others only offered her the praise and admiration 
which she loved. Towards the close of her life she said, " If I had to begin life over again 
I would marry, because a woman ought to live with a man and be in subjection." But 
perhaps she was wrong in this ; at all events, the regret that they have not lived some 
other life is not uncommon to devoted souls. She possessed a wonderful gift of raising 
those about her to somewhat of her own height ; and maybe she was more useful as a 
beaconlight revealing Christ in the heathenism of that dirty, crowded town, and really 
more fulfilling the will of the Father whose children these were whom she tended, raised, 
and saved, than if, in a comfortable, sheltered home of her own, she had passed a refined 
life surrounded by the children her woman's heart longed for. The life she lived might not 
seem the fairest to her here ; but no doubt she now sees differently, and understands 
God's compensations. Certainly to no life could she have been more admirably fitted.
The hospital under Sister Dora's charge became too small, and a new one was erected in 
an excellent situation, which contained twenty-eight beds. So quietly did she work that 
few in Walsall remember anything of her early months among them. The surgeon 
perceived her remarkable touch and great aptitude for surgery, and gladly taught to her 
this important part of her calling. Next she learnt the position of the arteries. She 
followed this course of study with delight, and was "constantly learning." She became a 
most expert assistant, and could in time set limbs, sew wounds, and bandage splendidly ; 
also in the treatment of burns she was eminently successful. But, also, her great success 
was partly owing to her high-bred sympathizing manner and personal beauty ; these 
inspired the rough colliers and iron-workers with unbounded confidence, so that she 
could frequently persuade them to undergo operations which their nearest relatives could 
not do.
One poor fellow tells how, after three months of the tenderest and most constant nursing, 
it was found impossible to save his leg. His father and brother in vain pleaded with him to 
part with it ; death was very near ; " so Sister came," seated herself by the bed, and talked 
so cheerily that the poor fellow dared face it if she were by, and next day the leg was 
amputated and his life was saved. But her greatest pleasure was to save a limb, well 
understanding that a working man's right hand is his fortune, and often she succeeded. 
One of the most touching incidents is this:—"A fine healthy young man was one night 
brought in with his arm torn and twisted by a machine. The doctor pronounced that 
nothing could save it, and that he must amputate at once. ' ? Sister, save my arm for me 
!—it's my right arm ! ' the poor fellow cried. Sister Dora thoughtfully turned to the 
surgeon, saying, ' I believe I can save this arm if you will let me try.' 'Are you mad? I tell 
you it's impossible —mortification will set in in a few hours ; nothing but amputation can 
save his life!' She turned quickly to the anxious patient. ' Are you willing for me to try 
and save your arm, my man ?' What would he not have been willing to let the woman do 
who turned upon him such a winning face and spoke in tones so strangely sympathetic? 
He joyfully gave consent. Then the surgeon let her have her way, but, ' He will die !' he 
said. She watched and tended ' her arm,1 as she called it, almost literally night and day 
for three weeks. It was a period of terrible suspense and anxiety. ' How I prayed over that 
arm ! ' she said afterwards ; and she, by God's mercy, saved it. Years afterwards, when 
she lay ill, that young man used to walk eleven miles into Walsall to ask how she was. 
'Tell Sister //i-rarm pulled the bell,' he used to say, and then turn and tramp back again."
Her hospital life was very regular. The day began at half-past six in the morning ; then 
she entered the wards, made the patients' beds, and gave them their breakfasts, all the 
time giving smiles and pleasant words. She bestowed nicknames, too—Burnty, Darkey, 
and so on. Rough, rude fellows constantly came in, and nobody had ever seen such a 
woman as this before—so beautiful, so good, so tender-hearted, so strong and so gentle, 
so full of fun and humour, and of sympathy for broken hearts, as well as for every other 
kind of fracture, and the best friend that many of these poor maimed men had ever 
known. After her own breakfast she read prayers on the staircase lobby, so that in all the 
wards her voice could be heard. Then came the doctors' rounds, and at twelve the 
patients' dinner, which she always carved herself, remembering their individual fancies, 
and dividing amongst them equally any little delicacy sent for her own use. At two 
o'clock the out-patients, from sixty to a hundred, trooped in ; all their faces brightened as 
Sister approached. She knew most, and cared for all of them. The lesser operations and 
the dressings were left to her care. Next came the patients' tea hour. They loved her to 
give it to them, and sometimes would wait long rather than have it from other hands. At 
six the nurses sat down to their own meal, but very often Sister Dora was hardly seated 
before a knock or bell summoned her away. "There is no peace for the wicked," she 
would say, as she, smiling, rose to go.
The most striking feature of hospital Iife under Sister Dora was its pleasantness. She 
would come into the wards and tell merry tales about the day's experiences in the town or 
amongst the out-patients, and bring in scraps of news. " She makes you laugh," said a big 
Irishman—"yes, if you were dying." She invented games, and would play them, too. 
Blessed with a quick sense of the ridiculous, she drew amusement from everything, and 
yet was so straightforward and shrewd that there was no deceiving her. " Ah, my poor 
fellow," she would say to one, " I am so sorry ! I wish I could bear it for you." " Now, 
don't make such a fuss," to another ; " tea will cure you." She said she lelt the tone of her 
wards her responsibility. She got the patients to help each other, to show mutual 
kindnesses.
 "Stop that!" she said curtly when she beard a man swear.
"I must say something when the pain's so bad, Sister."
"Then say poker and tongs; nothing else, remember!"
Infidels were brought in, and woke in the still night to hear Sister praying in low, fervent 
words by their bedsides for their salvation; or living His teaching before them day by day 
till perforce they too believed in Christ the Lord. They saw her lifting loathsome objects 
which others dare not touch, and carrying in that marvellous strength of hers the dead 
away alone to the mortuary, lest they should remain an unnecessary moment with the 
living. They saw her bearing loads of coal up and down the narrow stairs, and doing the 
most menial offices to spare other and weaker women, and yet always with that bright 
face and lady's manner which not the roughest there dare take a liberty with; so they not 
only loved, but reverenced her also. One of her rough patients, as he told the story of 
what she had done for himself, rose each time he spoke the name of "Sister Dora," and 
pulled his forelock in an awkward bow. And well they might so venerate her, for not only 
in the hospital was she an angel of mercy, but in every low alley and back slum of the 
place had she gone on her divine mission of love.
When the first small-pox epidemic broke out, she spared every possible moment from her 
work and her rest (which was always short enough) to visit infected streets. One night she 
entered a house where a man was dying of black pox in its worst form ; the last morsel of 
candle burnt away as she sat by him, for all had left him to die alone ; as it did so, the 
man with an expiring effort raised himself, and said, " Sister, kiss me before I die." She 
took him, all covered as he was with the loathsome disease, in her arms and kissed him, 
the candle going out as she did so, leaving them in total darkness. She sat on there until 
the morning broke and she was sure, by its uncertain light, that he was dead. This was in 
the early days of her Walsall life, while still remorse for her conduct to her father made 
her care little how she lost her life ; and it is singular that when she had passed through 
deeper trial still, one which again had made life valueless to her, the small-pox in a more 
awful visitation should sweep over the place, and that again, though singularly liable to 
infection, she should pass unscathed through it.
Her life for years had been very lonely, and now she became acquainted with a gentleman 
to whom in every way she could look up ; save in one particular only he was her superior. 
He loved her, and she returned his love with the entireness and intensity such a nature 
alone is capable of. The complete life her heart hungered for was within her grasp, and 
she eagerly seized it, and for a short time was unutterably happy. Then a true friend 
pointed out to her that the man she so loved was not a believer in Christ. The struggle 
was fierce though silent. At length she gave him up, and all her human love and hope 
also. She spoke to no one, told no one what she suffered, but went about her usual work 
in her usual manner. One night, however, she suddenly fainted away. Soon after, in 1875, 
the small-pox for the third time made its appearance. So fearful had been the former 
visitation that the corporation had erected an Epidemic Hospital, and it was now opened ; 
but uselessly—no patients would avail themselves of its shelter.
"They would far rather die at home ; they were not afraid, why could they not be left 
alone? " and so on. Many cases were deliberately concealed. In this strait Sister Dora 
came to the front; she offered to leave her Cottage Hospital in the charge of two lady 
pupils, and herself go alone and nurse at the Epidemic one. She knew the attraction of her 
own name; was it in the power of human nature not to be proud of such influence? Her 
one great fault was a jealousy of any others doing her work as well as herself or in any 
degree taking her place. She never attained the highest Christian grace, humility, that is to 
say in her work, and she was too true to pretend an abdication she did not feel. The only 
selfishness she showed was in that she could not bear to qualify others to supersede 
herself, therefore her hospital was not so efficiently managed as it might have been 
during her absence.
No sooner was it known that "Sister" was at the Epidemic Hospital than patients flocked 
in. She had no one to assist her save a drunken porter and a couple of old women; 
sometimes, indeed, she was all alone. On one of these occasions a great collier in his 
delirium jumped out of bed and tried to make his escape, she struggled with him, forced 
him back, and held him down until the morning.
Alone, she cleaned, and cooked, and nursed. She slept with two babies covered with the 
horrible disease in her arms. She did more even, for in her ambulance omnibus she drove 
to houses where she heard cases were, went in with "I've come for So-and-so," and 
carried the person out in her arms and drove off with them," her jolly face smiling all the 
way." Again and yet again when the disease seemed subdued it broke out afresh, and the 
newly cleaned wards were put to their former use. She lived in its atmosphere. "My tea," 
she wrote, "tastes of pox." The only visitors she saw were the doctor and the secretary of 
the Cottage Hospital, who loved her well enough to risk death for her, and who 
constantly brought her books, flowers, fruit,  &c.;  and a man called Chell, one of her old 
patients, was also a constant visitor. First she had cured a dislocated ankle of his and then 
nursed him through a severe amputation. He says he remembers nothing about the 
operation except that Sister Dora was there, and that "When I came to after the 
chloroform she was on her knees by my side, with her arm supporting my head, and she 
was repeating—
' They climbed the steep ascent to heaven, Through peril, toil, and pain ; O God, to us 
may grace be given, To follow in their train.'
And all through the pain and trouble that I had afterwards, I never forgot Sister's voice 
saying those words." This man never wearied of serving her. At length, after six long 
months, the small pox was conquered and Sister Dora returned to her Cottage Hospital. 
She had done wonders, but even she could never have passed successfully through such a 
time had not the Son of God been her support. Indeed, all through God was her strength 
and refuge. For years, when the bell which hung above her bed rang suddenly in the night 
she would say as she sprang up, "The Master is come and calleth for thee;" and from the 
Small-pox Hospital she wrote that she wanted sadly to come to the Holy Communion and 
to Mr. Twigg's evening service; "it would freshen up soul and body; but of course if the 
Master comes and calls for me and sends us in more cases I cannot come." Her next 
service was a frightful accident which happened also in 1875. Eleven men were scalded 
by molten metal, and ten were brought into the hospital "like charred logs."
"Sister, come and dress me. Do dress me!" rang out on all sides.
"Oh, my poor men! I'll dress you all if you'll only give me time."
Distracted by their passionate cries she gave them brandy and did the best she could, but 
it was awful work. One noble fellow who died that night, however, said—
"Sister Dora, I want to be dressed very bad, but if there's any wants you worse, go and do 
them first."
The sight was such and the smell so horrible, that those who came to help her went away 
sick and faint immediately. Two only, in spite of all her tender care, survived, and one of 
these was ill for twelve months.
But all cases were not sad, some caused smiles: one man came with a dog's bite plastered 
with hairs, evidently believing "in a hair of the dog that bit him." One day the doctor tells 
how he and Sister Dora were quietly talking together at a window, when suddenly she 
rushed out of doors and boxed a passing little boy's ears well, who had mischievously 
pushed an urchin's head through some railings near. So much of a woman that she feared 
a little dog, so much of a heroine that she at midnight visited the worst neighbourhoods 
where policemen dared not venture, entered dens where she was greeted with curses, 
where she knelt in prayer with the inmates and then led them to a mission midnight 
service!
Suddenly, just as the walls of the new hospital were rising which had been rendered 
necessary by her work, in the midst of active occupation, with exuberant life in her veins, 
most successful and beloved, she was told that she must die! Cancer had made its 
appearance, and surely and certainly Death had laid his hand upon her.
"Sister Dora was as like the Lord Jesus Christ as any human creature," had been the 
testimony to her outside life; but now the power of Christ in her, a power the outcome of 
long years of constant communion with Him, shone forth. So close had that intercourse 
been that she never dressed a wound without lifting up her heart in prayer to Him, and 
that she received each patient as a charge from Him. The very building she lived in was 
to her "a Maison Dieu." The secret of her great life lay in this constant prayer, as her 
support had been found in the wellworn Bible she always carried in her pocket.
She knew well the awful fiery furnace through which she must now pass to her rest, but 
her one thought was not for herself, but for a fuller dedication—"More work and better; 
the night was coming." She permitted no one to know her condition; and in this one point 
we think her loving biographer has hardly done Sister Dora justice—in implying that the 
horror she felt of any one, even her near relations, becoming aware of her disease, arose 
from pride, or the self-reliance which she carried to a fault. Rather, we think, it was that 
in cancer this dread is frequently a part of the complaint, and can no more be controlled 
than weeping can in paralysis.
Sister Dora still entertained her old patients brightly, and drove, in the pony carriage they 
had given her, during the night to outlying villages visiting the sick. And then, as the new 
building was not ready, and the old hospital had to be pulled down, she took her holiday 
in studying the new surgical appliances in the Paris Exhibition, and in watching eagerly 
Mr. Lister operate. But her twelve months' hidden secret now spoke out in a bad cough 
and uncontrollable anguish, and knowing that an examination of her chest would reveal 
all she hurried back to Walsall.
"Let me die among my own people," she begged, and from a little house there she wrote, 
"There is only Mount Calvary to climb by the ladder of sickness. I can join in the words 
of our beautiful Prayer-book—' Render unto Him humble thanks for his Fatherly 
visitation.' Do pray, dear brother, that, as my pain increases, so may my faith and 
patience. I have not had two hours' sleep for four days and nights, but in the midst of the 
fiery furnace there was a form like unto the Son of God." Her poor people could not 
believe that she was dying.
"Her'll get well, her never can be going to die."
But she was to die, and in agony, too; yet could she say, "I have so longed to go home, I 
am so happy; I have not a care, all is sunshine. God has taken away the fear of death, and 
all sorrow at parting with life." Her dying room was filled, indeed, with brightness; her 
smiles and jokes were constant. She named her poor swollen arm "Sir Roger;" but as the 
weary weeks went by a bitter struggle went on in her own soul, for the old doubts 
upreared themselves.
"I sadly fear I shall be lost. I can only trust," she cried. She had a crucifix fastened to her 
bedroom wall, and her eyes constantly turned to this reminder of His sufferings to Whom 
alone she clung in these deep waters.
The new hospital was opened, as she lay thus, amidst tears in "Sister Dora's name," on 
the fourth of November, and yet the battle went on. "' He that believeth in Me hath 
everlasting life,' that is just what I want," she said, as at length victory drew near.
Thinking of others to the last, her Christmas presents to her poor friends were arranged 
by her own hands. At length the end came.
On December 24th, 1878, after two days of dying horror and agony, she suddenly said, "I 
am dying, run for Sister Ellen."
Her old servant replied, "Our Blessed Lord is standing at the gates of heaven to open 
them for you."
But she no longer needed such consolation, all her darkness was gone, and she answered, 
"I see Him there, the gates are wide open."
When all human efforts for her relief had been exhausted, she said, as they stood 
watching her, "I have lived alone, let me die alone—let me die alone."
And so in the silence of an empty chamber, tenantless of human friends, but doubtless 
crowded by invisible ones, Sister Dora died to earth, and lived to God.
"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends."
  * * * * *  
Not only the great of the land, but sorrowing thousands of the poor who loved her, 
followed Sister Dora to her humble grave. And one of their tributes of affection is to be a 
statue of the beautiful and noble woman who lived Christlike amongst them for fifteen 
years. When asked why, if she were so well remembered, a statue need be erected to her 
there, one working man spoke out the mingled love and pride of the rest, when he 
replied—
"Why, nobody knows better than I do that we shan't forget her, no danger of that; but I 
want her to be there, so that when strangers come to the place, and see her standing up, 
they shall ask us, 'Who's that?' And then we shall say, ' Who's that? Why, that's our Sister 
Dora.' "
