dlps id="UVA" rend="none"dlps page-images="none" figure-images="no"dlps 
transcription="none"
  Wilmot-Buxton_Book of Noble Women  
University of Virginia Library
September 29, 2009
 Andrew Curley, University of Virginia Library corrector 
Minor corrections to vendor markup.
  
SISTER DORA
  
A SISTER DORA 
 (DOROTHY WINSLOW PATTISON)
"Her Angel's face 
 As the great eye of Heaven shyned bright 
 And made a sunshine in the shady place."
Spenser, Faery Queene
No place in the world perhaps needs sunshine—
 moral as well as actual sunshine—as the 
 wards of a hospital.
It is hard, too, for the sun to shine in Walsall, 
 because of the pall of smoke that hangs over the 
 town, with its many chimneys and great iron 
 foundries. The inhabitants of the place are not 
 of the most refined order, yet the roughest of 
 the rough iron-workers had a smile and a nod 
 for the bright-faced woman in nurse's uniform as she 
 passed amongst them.
For it was she who had brought the sunshine 
 of human sympathy and tenderness to them, or 
 to their relatives who had suffered in disease 
 or accident—suffered often despairingly, till she 
 had brought to them the gift of hope. And if 
 you asked any of those grimy fellows who it 
 was who had passed by, they would reply, in 
 surprise at your ignorance—
  
"Who is it? Why, it's our Sister Dora!"
In the year 1832 Dora Pattison was born in 
 the little Yorkshire village of Hauxwell, in the 
 North Riding of Yorkshire, of which her father 
 was the rector. Her childhood was marked by a 
 quiet but persistent determination to get her 
 own way by one device or another, which 
 already spoke of the strong will and firm 
 purpose of the future woman. In these early 
 days, however, it was occasionally doomed to 
 failure. She tells an amusing story of some 
 hated velvet bonnets which she and her sister 
 were obliged to wear on Sundays. Dora was 
 determined firmly to avoid appearing in them; 
 so she waited for a soaking wet day, and only 
 delaying long enough to make sure her mother 
 had gone for a drive, rushed upstairs and said 
 to her sister, "Be quick: now's our chance for 
 spoiling our bonnets!"
Hastily they put them on, opened the library 
 windows and stuck their heads well out, until 
 the velvet was drenched through and through. 
 When the soaking was complete, the offensive 
 headgear was put away again. Sunday came, 
 and their mother, seeing them bareheaded, inquired, 
 "Where are your bonnets?"
"Quite spoilt," replied Dora firmly; "we can 
 never wear them again."
Mrs Pattison thought differently, however; they 
 were made to wear them for many a long week, and the 
 naughty little girls were obliged to confess that they 
 had not improved matters by their skilful manœuvre.
  
The healthy, open life of the moors changed 
 Dora from a delicate child to a strong, bonny, merry 
 girl, full of a vigour which became restlessness as 
 soon as her energy failed to find sufficient scope. 
 She was intensely eager to join Miss Nightingale's 
 band of nurses for the Crimea; but her father, 
 realising her want of training and discipline, told 
 her, quite rightly, that she would be worse than 
 useless, and refused to let her go. She chafed 
 inwardly, but outwardly submitted for a time to 
 the quiet home-life, of which her bright face 
 and never failing spirits made her the "Sunshine" 
 that her father always called her. Then her 
 mother died, and a new fit of restless energy took 
 possession of the girl.
Nothing would content her but a life of hard 
 work and poverty; and so she became a village 
 schoolmistress, where she obtained all she could 
 want of both. She loved the children and managed 
 them excellently, but her vocation did not lie in 
 the direction of teaching. The loneliness of the 
 country cottage oppressed her spirits; she constantly 
 wished to be elsewhere. Suddenly she 
 made up her mind that if she could but go into 
 a Sisterhood all would be well—that the giving up 
 of that strong will of hers would lead to perfect 
 peace. A severe illness forced her to resign her 
 school-work, and she barely allowed herself time 
 to get well before attaching herself in her usual 
 headstrong haste to a working Sisterhood at 
 Coatham, in Yorkshire.
It was not in the least likely that such a 
  restricted life would suit her. She was of too 
 strong a nature to mould her character according 
 to the bidding of others, too fond of her own 
 way to ever really give up her will, and had too 
 masculine a force of both mind and body ever 
 to settle down happily in a community of women. 
 But it was a period of excellent discipline for her. 
 Cleaning hearths, making beds, or scrubbing floors 
 is no bad outlet for superfluous energy, though 
 she was very thankful when the opening of a 
 little cottage hospital at Walsall gave her more 
 congenial work.
At first Sister Dora, as she was henceforth to be 
 called, was the merest subordinate, as became her position 
 as a novice almost entirely ignorant of nursing.
Most of the cases brought to the hospital were 
 surgical, the result of the ghastly accidents which 
 were always occurring in the coal and iron 
 pits; and so expert did she soon become in 
 tending these that when a sudden order from 
 the Coatham Sisterhood bade her go at once and 
 nurse a private case in Devonshire, both the 
 hospital committee and she herself were inclined 
 to rebel. Just at that moment a letter reached 
 her with the news that her father was dying, and 
 earnestly wished to see her. She telegraphed 
 to Coatham for leave to go to him at once; but, 
 possibly with the idea that she needed to be 
 taught the lesson of obedience and self-denial, this 
 was refused. With a heavy heart, she set off for 
 Devonshire, and had only just arrived when she 
 heard of her father's death.
  
She returned at once to Walsall, wretched and 
 deeply depressed in mind and body. Henceforth 
 her connection with the Sisterhood was much 
 weakened, except in so far as she wished to carry 
 on the work she had begun with them. A few 
 years later she parted from it altogether; but 
 long before this time her real vocation had made 
 itself clear.
The cottage hospital no longer sufficed for its 
 patients' needs, and when a new building was 
 raised on the top of the "Mount," a hill overlooking 
 the town, its sole management was put 
 into the hands of Sister Dora. Scarcely was it 
 opened when smallpox broke out in Walsall, and 
 although infectious cases were not admitted, the 
 brave woman, arguing that she was exposed to 
 infection anyhow from the many surgical outpatients 
 who came to her with the disease upon 
 them, gave up the time that should have been 
 devoted to sleep or rest, to nursing in their own 
 homes those who otherwise would have been entirely 
 neglected.
She was called one night to the bedside of one 
 of her old patients, who was dying of the disease 
 in its most malignant form. He was quite alone 
 in a miserable room lit by one small bit of candle-end. 
 Calling a neighbour, Sister Dora gave her 
 money to buy some means of light, while she 
 remained with the sufferer. The woman never 
 returned, and so she sat in the gathering darkness 
 alone with the dying man. Just as the candle 
 was sputtering out, he rose in bed, exclaiming, 
  "Sister, kiss me before I die." She took him in 
 her arms and kissed the poor disfigured face, 
 promising she would never leave him while he 
 lived. And then began the awful watching, in 
 complete darkness, for the death which she did not 
 recognise even when it came. For when, at the 
 first glimmer of dawn, she went to seek his 
 neighbours, the man had been dead some 
 hours.
Her chief interest lay, however, in trying to save 
 the limbs of those who had been mutilated by the 
 machinery of the iron pits. One of these cases was 
 especially touching. A fine strong young collier 
 was brought in with a terribly mangled arm. 
 "Nothing can save it; amputation must take place 
 at once," pronounced the surgeon. The answering 
 groan of despair from the patient called up on the 
 nurse's face a look of such deep pity that the man 
 exclaimed, "Oh, Sister, save my arm for me! It's 
 my right arm."
Turning to the doctor, she said, "I believe I can 
 save this arm, if you will let me try."
The doctor was naturally extremely angry, and 
 told her roughly that he knew best, and that if the 
 arm were not amputated at once, the man would die.
The patient listened eagerly to the altercation; 
 but when the choice was given him, he gladly 
 consented to take his chance with Sister 
 Dora.
"Very well," said the irate surgeon; "but 
 remember it's your arm—you take the responsibility. 
 I will have nothing to do with the case."
  
So she was left to do as best she could. "How 
 I prayed over that arm!" she used to say in later 
 days, when she described the almost ceaseless tending 
 given to it for three weeks. At the end of that time, 
 she called the doctor to inspect her work. "Why, 
 you have saved it!" he cried, and with generous 
 triumph brought in the whole of the hospital staff 
 to show them "what could be done in the way of 
 conservative surgery," as he called it.
Some time after her patient had left the hospital, 
 Sister Dora had a severe illness, brought on by overwork 
 and worry. All through this anxious period this 
 young man walked eleven miles into Walsall every 
 Sunday, his only holiday, and giving a vigorous pull 
 at the bell, would ask, "How's Sister?" And when 
 he had been answered, he would say, "Tell her that's 
 her arm what rang the bell," and then turned to 
 walk his weary journey back again.
Her influence over men was wonderful, and a 
 sojourn in her hospital ward often sent a man out 
 a reformed character. Her delightful humour was 
 partly the secret of this influence. "Make you 
 laugh?" said a burly Irishman. "She'd make you 
 laugh if you were dying!"
"My dear," she would sometimes say, "if I could 
 not laugh over the things, I don't know what I 
 should do."
Her powers of endurance were even more marvellous. 
 From the time she rose in the morning 
 till the last thing at night she was incessantly at 
 work; and the bell which hung over her bed, and 
 communicated with the patients' ward, was seldom 
  still at night. Perhaps she erred on the side 
 of thinking that no one could ever take her place or 
 relieve her of any of her duties because of their 
 comparative inefficiency; certainly her patients 
 considered themselves ill-used if they were tended 
 by any hands save hers.
In 1875 a fresh and terrible outbreak of smallpox 
 occurred in Walsall. An epidemic hospital 
 had been built on the outskirts of the town, but no 
 power could induce the poor people to send their 
 infected relations thither, and so stay the spread of 
 the disease. At this crisis Sister Dora suddenly 
 offered to leave her own work and go to nurse the 
 patients in the smallpox hospital. The authorities 
 eagerly seized the chance. Others might manage 
 the accidents; only Sister Dora could induce the 
 Walsall folk to send their smallpox cases to be 
 under her care.
The offer was not made lightly; for Sister Dora 
 was one of those who catch every disease to which 
 they are exposed, and she went, moreover, with a 
 depressing conviction that she should never return 
 to her beloved accident wards. Yet she only 
 flinched once from what she considered a plain 
 duty, and that was when she found herself on the 
 doorstep of the incredibly dismal building, standing 
 in the midst of heaps of "slag," with a few blackened 
 cabbages growing at its entrance.
Shivering with irrepressible dread at the thought 
 of a lonely struggle with the most loathsome form 
 of disease, she said to the surgeon who had brought 
 her, "Oh, take me back! I can't endure this dreadful 
  place—I did not know what it would be like!" 
 His only reply was "Come in!"—and from the 
 moment she crossed the threshold the victory was 
 won.
Nothing but the strongest religious faith could 
 have kept her up in the long battle with disease. 
 She was quite alone save for two old women who 
 came in occasionally from the workhouse to help 
 with the washing, and a night porter who often 
 stayed away and got drunk. Sometimes the delirious 
 patients tried to escape, and she had a hard fight 
 to keep them in bed. All this terrible time she had 
 scarcely any rest, but read the most exciting novels 
 she could get at night to prevent herself becoming 
 too sleepy. When those who were attacked in their 
 own homes refused to come to the hospital, the 
 Sister would go and fetch them herself, lifting them 
 in her arms to the ambulance as though they had 
 been babies instead of grown men and women. 
 Yet she could write, "I thank God daily for my life 
 here. I feel He sent me, and He has blessed it to 
 my own soul." And so that six months of incessant 
 toil amid loathsome surroundings came to an end, 
 and she returned with joy to her own beloved 
 hospital.
Suddenly, in the midst of all her splendid work, 
 the call came to lay it aside. A terrible internal 
 disease manifested itself, but true to all her self-denying 
 instincts Sister Dora kept the fact a 
 complete secret, and went on working harder than 
 ever. Then a period of enforced holiday occurred, 
 while a new and improved hospital was being made 
  ready for her patients. She visited Paris and 
 London, intent on studying the latest surgical 
 appliances, but these she was never destined 
 to use. Her disease made rapid progress, and 
 her one cry now was, "Let me die among my own 
 people!"
So she returned to Walsall, to a little house 
 near the unfinished hospital; but the news of her 
 severe illness was received by her "children" 
 —rough miners and factory workers—with utter 
 incredulity. Her wonderful strength and vitality 
 had become a matter of course to them. "Her'll 
 get well," they said; "her never can be going to 
 die."
But when they at length understood, despair 
 reigned in all the slums and byways of Walsall. 
 It was given her to see the new hospital opened, "in 
 the name of Sister Dora"; but the end was drawing 
 very near. For a time she was haunted by a 
 horror of that "Brother Death" whose approach 
 had become so familiar to her in the case of others, 
 but this at length passed quite away.
Years before, a little girl of nine years old, too 
 badly burnt to live, had been laid in the nurse's 
 arms. Nothing could be done for her, but Sister 
 Dora never ceased to soothe and comfort the dying 
 child until the end. The little one died quite 
 happily, saying very simply, as she put up her 
 mouth to be kissed, "When you come to heaven, 
 Sister, I'll meet you at the gates with a bunch of 
 flowers."
We can but believe that Sister Dora's last hour, 
  in the loneliness of death, was cheered by the 
 remembrance of those many souls whom she had 
 tended during their last moments and helped to face 
 death with courage, and who now would throng to 
 meet their "own Sister" on the other side of the 
 grave.
